General Instructions:
1. It should be borne in mind that syllabus is the main guiding factor which should not only be read but strictly
adhered to before trying our hand at setting the questions.
2. If the question setter finds some variation between the syllabus and the sample paper, the syllabus is to be
religiously followed.
3. Directional language of the questions should be standardised so that different question setters do not use
different sets of language for the same purpose. For example “ Read the passage given below and answer the
questions that follow,” is not only preferable but far better than “Read the following passage and answer the
questions that follow,” and “Read the following passage and answer the questions given below. “Standard
language used in previous years’ Board question papers may be followed.
4. Word limit of answers to the questions wherever needed should be the same as given in the syllabus and it
should be a part of the question itself and not mentioned within the brackets at the end.
5. Before framing a question, the question setter should be clear in his mind as to what he expects as an answer.
The directions should therefore be clearly worded. The paper setter should also be very sure whether the
answer can be given within the specified word limit.
SECTION A (READING)
6. Students of several streams have to attempt language papers. Topics of general interest should be selected
instead of very specialised ones which cater to the needs of only specific groups requiring a techinical vocabulary. However, the passages may be literary or biographical, a travelogue or a piece of fiction. There must not
be any religious, political, social and gender bias.
7. The questions, specifically on the passage for comprehension, whether they are direct, inferential or
extrapolative, should have answers within the text.
8. While choosing a passage or framing questions, interest of the average students [nearly 70%] should be kept
in mind. However 15% weightage has to be given to the questions for the bright and the remaining 15% for
below average students. Passages should not be copied from guide books.
2
D\THREE\CBSE\SQPDASS\ENGLISHSECTION B (WRITING)
9. The aim of this section is to test the writing skills of the candidates. Wherever required, according to the
syllabus, verbal input in the questions must be provided. But it should be neither too short nor too long.
10. Situations chosen for writing task should be within the experience of an average candidate. It should not be, for
example, on topics such as “Visit to France,” “Skiing in switzerland etc,” as it is beyond the experience of most
of the candidates.
11. Visuals given as input often do not throw much light on the questions asked and are often unclear. A visual
should be so clear that it can be easily printed.
SECTION C (GRAMMAR)
12. The exercise in jumbled words to be arranged in sentences should not consist of isolated sentences.
They should be asked in a context. Number of words in each sentence should not ordinarily exceed 15.
13. Maximum number of items of grammar as prescribed in the syllabus should be tested in context and not in
isolation. For example in the question on change of narration, there should be a running paragraph instead of
isolated sentences.
SECTION D (TEXT BOOK/LITERATURE)
14. Before framing a question, the question setter should be clear in his mind as to what he expects as an answer.
The directions should therefore be clearly worded. The paper setter should also be very sure whether the
answer can be given within the specified word limit.