Unit 3
ClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and
PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs
The Periodic Table is arguably the most important concept
in chemistry, both in principle and in practice. It is the
everyday support for students, it suggests new avenues
of research to professionals, and it provides a succinct
After studying this Unit, you will be organization of the whole of chemistry. It is a remarkable
able to demonstration of the fact that the chemical elements are
not a random cluster of entities but instead display trends
• appreciate how the concept of
and lie together in families. An awareness of the Periodic
grouping elements in accordance
Table is essential to anyone who wishes to disentangle
to their properties led to the
the world and see how it is built up from the fundamental
development of Periodic Table.
building blocks of the chemistry, the chemical elements.
• understand the Periodic Law;
• understand the significance of Glenn T. Seaborg
atomic number and electronic
configuration as the basis for
periodic classification;
In this Unit, we will study the historical development of the
• name the elements with
Periodic Table as it stands today and the Modern Periodic
Z >100 according to IUPAC
Law. We will also learn how the periodic classification
nomenclature;
follows as a logical consequence of the electronic
• classify elements into s, p, d,
configuration of atoms. Finally, we shall examine some of
f blocks and learn their main
the periodic trends in the physical and chemical properties
characteristics;
of the elements.
• recognise the periodic trends in
physical and chemical properties
3.1 WHy do WE nEEd to Classify ElEmEnts ?
of elements;
We know by now that the elements are the basic units of
• compare the reactivity of elements
all types of matter. In 1800, only 31 elements were known.
and correlate it with their
occurrence in nature; By 1865, the number of identified elements had more than
doubled to 63. At present 114 elements are known. Of
• explain the relationship between
ionization enthalpy and metallic them, the recently discovered elements are man-made.
character; Efforts to synthesise new elements are continuing. With
• use scientific vocabulary such a large number of elements it is very difficult to
appropriately to communicate study individually the chemistry of all these elements and
ideas related to certain important their innumerable compounds individually. To ease out
properties of atoms e.g., this problem, scientists searched for a systematic way to
atomic/ionic radii, ionization
organise their knowledge by classifying the elements. Not
enthalpy, electron gain enthalpy,
only that it would rationalize known chemical facts about
electronegativity, valence of
elements, but even predict new ones for undertaking
elements.
further study.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 74 9/9/2022 4:36:12 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 75
3.2 GEnEsis of PEriodiC the periodic recurrence of properties. This
ClassifiCation also did not attract much attention. The
English chemist, John Alexander Newlands
Classification of elements into groups and
development of Periodic Law and Periodic in 1865 profounded the law of octaves. He
arranged the elements in increasing order
Table are the consequences of systematising
of their atomic weights and noted that every
the knowledge gained by a number of
eighth element had properties similar to the
scientists through their observations and
first element (Table 3.2). The relationship was
experiments. The German chemist, Johann
just like every eighth note that resembles the
Dobereiner in early 1800’s was the first to
first in octaves of music. Newlands’s Law of
consider the idea of trends among properties
Octaves seemed to be true only for elements
of elements. By 1829 he noted a similarity
up to calcium. Although his idea was not
among the physical and chemical properties
widely accepted at that time, he, for his work,
of several groups of three elements (triads). In
was later awarded Davy Medal in 1887 by the
each case, he noticed that the middle element
Royal Society, London.
of each of the triads had an atomic weight
about half way between the atomic weights of
The Periodic Law, as we know it today
the other two (Table 3.1). Also the properties
owes its development to the Russian chemist,
of the middle element were in between those
Dmitri Mendeleev (1834-1907) and the
of the other two members. Since Dobereiner’s
German chemist, Lothar Meyer (1830-1895).
table 3.1 dobereiner’s triads
atomic atomic atomic
Element Element Element
weight weight weight
li 7 Ca 40 Cl 35.5
na 23 sr 88 Br 80
K 39 Ba 137 i 127
relationship, referred to as the law of triads, Working independently, both the chemists in
seemed to work only for a few elements, it was 1869 proposed that on arranging elements in
dismissed as coincidence. The next reported the increasing order of their atomic weights,
attempt to classify elements was made by a similarities appear in physical and chemical
French geologist, A.E.B. de Chancourtois in properties at regular intervals. Lothar Meyer
1862. He arranged the then known elements plotted the physical properties such as
in order of increasing atomic weights and atomic volume, melting point and boiling
made a cylindrical table of elements to display point against atomic weight and obtained
table 3.2 newlands’ octaves
Element li Be B C n o f
At. wt. 7 9 11 12 14 16 19
Element na mg al si P s Cl
At. wt. 23 24 27 29 31 32 35.5
Element K Ca
At. wt. 39 40
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 75 9/9/2022 4:36:12 PM76 chemistry
a periodically repeated pattern. Unlike classification if the order of atomic weight
Newlands, Lothar Meyer observed a change was strictly followed. He ignored the order
in length of that repeating pattern. By 1868, of atomic weights, thinking that the atomic
Lothar Meyer had developed a table of the measurements might be incorrect, and placed
elements that closely resembles the Modern the elements with similar properties together.
Periodic Table. However, his work was not For example, iodine with lower atomic weight
published until after the work of Dmitri than that of tellurium (Group VI) was placed
Mendeleev, the scientist who is generally in Group VII along with fluorine, chlorine,
credited with the development of the Modern bromine because of similarities in properties
Periodic Table. (Fig. 3.1). At the same time, keeping his
While Dobereiner initiated the study of primary aim of arranging the elements of
periodic relationship, it was Mendeleev who similar properties in the same group, he
was responsible for publishing the Periodic proposed that some of the elements were
Law for the first time. It states as follows : still undiscovered and, therefore, left several
gaps in the table. For example, both gallium
The properties of the elements are
and germanium were unknown at the time
a periodic function of their atomic
Mendeleev published his Periodic Table.
weights.
He left the gap under aluminium and a gap
Mendeleev arranged elements in horizontal under silicon, and called these elements
rows and vertical columns of a table in order
Eka-aluminium and Eka-silicon. Mendeleev
of their increasing atomic weights in such a
predicted not only the existence of gallium and
way that the elements with similar properties
germanium, but also described some of their
occupied the same vertical column or group.
general physical properties. These elements
Mendeleev’s system of classifying elements
were discovered later. Some of the properties
was more elaborate than that of Lothar
predicted by Mendeleev for these elements
Meyer’s. He fully recognized the significance
and those found experimentally are listed in
of periodicity and used broader range of
Table 3.3.
physical and chemical properties to classify
the elements. In particular, Mendeleev relied The boldness of Mendeleev’s quantitative
on the similarities in the empirical formulas predictions and their eventual success
and properties of the compounds formed by made him and his Periodic Table famous.
the elements. He realized that some of the Mendeleev’s Periodic Table published in 1905
elements did not fit in with his scheme of is shown in Fig. 3.1.
table 3.3 mendeleev’s Predictions for the Elements Eka-aluminium (Gallium) and
Eka-silicon (Germanium)
Eka-aluminium Gallium Eka-silicon Germanium
Property
(predicted) (found) (predicted) (found)
atomic weight 68 70 72 72.6
density/(g/cm3) 5.9 5.94 5.5 5.36
melting point/K Low 302.93 High 1231
formula of oxide E O Ga O EO GeO
2 3 2 3 2 2
formula of chloride E Cl GaCl ECl GeCl
3 3 4 4
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 76 9/9/2022 4:36:12 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 77
SEIRES
DNA
SPUORG
NI
STNEMELE
EHT
FO
METSYS
CIDOIREP
reilrae
dehsilbup
elbaT
cidoireP
s’veeledneM
1.3
.giF
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 77 9/9/2022 4:36:12 PM78 chemistry
3.3 modErn PEriodiC laW and tHE physical and chemical properties of elements
PrEsEnt form of tHE PEriodiC and their compounds.
taBlE
Numerous forms of Periodic Table have
We must bear in mind that when Mendeleev been devised from time to time. Some
developed his Periodic table, chemists forms emphasise chemical reactions and
knew nothing about the internal structure valence, whereas others stress the electronic
of atom. However, the beginning of the 20th configuration of elements. A modern version,
century witnessed profound developments the so-called “long form” of the Periodic
in theories about sub-atomic particles. In table of the elements (Fig. 3.2), is the most
1913, the English physicist, Henry Moseley convenient and widely used. The horizontal
observed regularities in the characteristic rows (which Mendeleev called series) are
X-ray spectra of the elements. A plot of called periods and the vertical columns,
(where is frequency of X-rays emitted) groups. Elements having similar outer
against atomic number (Z) gave a straight electronic configurations in their atoms
line and not the plot of vs atomic mass. are arranged in vertical columns, referred
to as groups or families. According to the
He thereby showed that the atomic number
recommendation of International Union of
is a more fundamental property of an element
Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC), the
than its atomic mass. mendeleev’s Periodic
groups are numbered from 1 to 18 replacing
law was, therefore, accordingly modified. This
the older notation of groups IA … VIIA, VIII,
is known as the modern Periodic law and
IB … VIIB and 0.
can be stated as :
There are altogether seven periods. The
The physical and chemical properties
period number corresponds to the highest
of the elements are periodic functions principal quantum number (n) of the elements
of their atomic numbers.
in the period. The first period contains 2
The Periodic law revealed important elements. The subsequent periods consists of
analogies among the 94 naturally occurring 8, 8, 18, 18 and 32 elements, respectively. The
elements (neptunium and plutonium like seventh period is incomplete and like the sixth
actinium and protoactinium are also found period would have a theoretical maximum
in pitch blende – an ore of uranium). It (on the basis of quantum numbers) of 32
stimulated renewed interest in Inorganic elements. In this form of the Periodic Table,
Chemistry and has carried into the present
14 elements of both sixth and seventh periods
with the creation of artificially produced
(lanthanoids and actinoids, respectively) are
short-lived elements.
placed in separate panels at the bottom*.
You may recall that the atomic number
3.4 nomEnClatUrE of ElEmEnts
is equal to the nuclear charge (i.e., number
WitH atomiC nUmBErs > 100
of protons) or the number of electrons in
a neutral atom. It is then easy to visualize The naming of the new elements had been
the significance of quantum numbers and traditionally the privilege of the discoverer
electronic configurations in periodicity of (or discoverers) and the suggested name was
elements. In fact, it is now recognized that the ratified by the IUPAC. In recent years this has
Periodic Law is essentially the consequence led to some controversy. The new elements
of the periodic variation in electronic with very high atomic numbers are so unstable
configurations, which indeed determine the that only minute quantities, sometimes only
* Glenn T. Seaborg’s work in the middle of the 20th century starting with the discovery of plutonium in 1940, followed by
those of all the transuranium elements from 94 to 102 led to reconfiguration of the periodic table placing the actinoids below
the lanthanoids. In 1951, Seaborg was awarded the Nobel Prize in chemistry for his work. Element 106 has been named
Seaborgium (Sg) in his honour.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 78 9/9/2022 4:36:13 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 79
0
B
IIV
B
IV
B
V
B
VI
B
III
AII
AI
B
II
B
I
→
IIIV
←
A
IIV
A
IV
A
V
A
VI
A
III
cinortcele
retuo
etats
dnuorg
dna
srebmun
cimota
rieht
htiw
stnemelE
eht
fo
elbaT
cidoireP
eht
fo
mrof
gnoL
2.3
.giF
sihT
.snoitadnemmocer
CAPUI
4891
eht
htiw
ecnadrocca
ni
81-1
derebmun
era
spuorg
ehT
.snoitarugfinoc
.stnemele
eht
rof
0
dna
BIIV–BI
,IIIV
,AIIV–AI
fo
emehcs
gnirebmun
dlo
eht
secalper
noitaton
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 79 9/9/2022 4:36:13 PM80 chemistry
a few atoms of them are obtained. Their digits which make up the atomic number and
synthesis and characterisation, therefore, “ium” is added at the end. The IUPAC names
require highly sophisticated costly equipment for elements with Z above 100 are shown in
and laboratory. Such work is carried out with Table 3.5.
competitive spirit only in some laboratories
in the world. Scientists, before collecting the
table 3.4 notation for iUPaC
reliable data on the new element, at times nomenclature of Elements
get tempted to claim for its discovery. For
example, both American and Soviet scientists digit name abbreviation
claimed credit for discovering element 104.
0 nil n
The Americans named it Rutherfordium
1 un u
whereas Soviets named it Kurchatovium. To
2 bi b
avoid such problems, the IUPAC has made
3 tri t
recommendation that until a new element’s
4 quad q
discovery is proved, and its name is officially
5 pent p
recognised, a systematic nomenclature be
6 hex h
derived directly from the atomic number of
7 sept s
the element using the numerical roots for
8 oct o
0 and numbers 1-9. These are shown in
9 enn e
Table 3.4. The roots are put together in order of
table 3.5 nomenclature of Elements with atomic number above 100
atomic name according to iUPaC iUPaC
symbol
number iUPaC nomenclature Official Name symbol
101 Unnilunium Unu Mendelevium Md
102 Unnilbium Unb Nobelium No
103 Unniltrium Unt Lawrencium Lr
104 Unnilquadium Unq Rutherfordium Rf
105 Unnilpentium Unp Dubnium Db
106 Unnilhexium Unh Seaborgium Sg
107 Unnilseptium Uns Bohrium Bh
108 Unniloctium Uno Hassium Hs
109 Unnilennium Une Meitnerium Mt
110 Ununnillium Uun Darmstadtium Ds
111 Unununnium Uuu Rontgenium Rg
112 Ununbium Uub Copernicium Cn
113 Ununtrium Uut Nihonium Nh
114 Ununquadium Uuq Flerovium Fl
115 Ununpentium Uup Moscovium Mc
116 Ununhexium Uuh Livermorium Lv
117 Ununseptium Uus Tennessine Ts
118 Ununoctium Uuo Oganesson Og
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 80 9/9/2022 4:36:13 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 81
Thus, the new element first gets a be readily seen that the number of elements
temporary name, with symbol consisting in each period is twice the number of atomic
of three letters. Later permanent name orbitals available in the energy level that is
and symbol are given by a vote of IUPAC being filled. The first period (n = 1) starts with
representatives from each country. The the filling of the lowest level (1s) and therefore
permanent name might reflect the country has two elements — hydrogen (ls1) and helium
(or state of the country) in which the element (ls2) when the first shell (K) is completed. The
was discovered, or pay tribute to a notable second period (n = 2) starts with lithium and the
scientist. As of now, elements with atomic third electron enters the 2s orbital. The next
numbers up to 118 have been discovered. element, beryllium has four electrons and has
Official names of all elements have been the electronic configuration 1s22s2. Starting
announced by IUPAC. from the next element boron, the 2p orbitals
are filled with electrons when the L shell is
Problem 3.1 completed at neon (2s22p6). Thus there are
8 elements in the second period. The third
What would be the IUPAC name and
period (n = 3) begins at sodium, and the added
symbol for the element with atomic
number 120? electron enters a 3s orbital. Successive filling
of 3s and 3p orbitals gives rise to the third
solution
period of 8 elements from sodium to argon. The
From Table 3.4, the roots for 1, 2 and 0 fourth period (n = 4) starts at potassium, and
are un, bi and nil, respectively. Hence, the added electrons fill up the 4s orbital. Now
the symbol and the name respectively you may note that before the 4p orbital is filled,
are Ubn and unbinilium. filling up of 3d orbitals becomes energetically
favourable and we come across the so called 3d
3.5 ElECtroniC ConfiGUrations transition series of elements. This starts from
of ElEmEnts and tHE PEriodiC scandium (Z = 21) which has the electronic
taBlE configuration 3d14s2. The 3d orbitals are filled
In the preceding unit we have learnt that an at zinc (Z=30) with electronic configuration
electron in an atom is characterised by a set 3d104s2. The fourth period ends at krypton
of four quantum numbers, and the principal with the filling up of the 4p orbitals. Altogether
quantum number (n ) defines the main energy we have 18 elements in this fourth period. The
level known as shell. We have also studied fifth period (n = 5) beginning with rubidium
about the filling of electrons into different is similar to the fourth period and contains
subshells, also referred to as orbitals (s, p, the 4d transition series starting at yttrium
d, f ) in an atom. The distribution of electrons (Z = 39). This period ends at xenon with the
filling up of the 5p orbitals. The sixth period
into orbitals of an atom is called its electronic
(n = 6) contains 32 elements and successive
configuration. An element’s location in the
electrons enter 6s, 4f, 5d and 6p orbitals, in
Periodic Table reflects the quantum numbers
the order — filling up of the 4f orbitals begins
of the last orbital filled. In this section we
with cerium (Z = 58) and ends at lutetium
will observe a direct connection between the
(Z = 71) to give the 4f-inner transition series
electronic configurations of the elements and
which is called the lanthanoid series. The
the long form of the Periodic Table.
seventh period (n = 7) is similar to the sixth
(a) Electronic Configurations in Periods period with the successive filling up of the
7s, 5f, 6d and 7p orbitals and includes most
The period indicates the value of n for the
of the man-made radioactive elements. This
outermost or valence shell. In other words,
period will end at the element with atomic
successive period in the Periodic Table is
number 118 which would belong to the noble
associated with the filling of the next higher
gas family. Filling up of the 5f orbitals after
principal energy level (n = 1, n = 2, etc.). It can
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 81 9/9/2022 4:36:13 PM82 chemistry
actinium (Z = 89) gives the 5f-inner transition a theoretical foundation for the periodic
series known as the actinoid series. The 4f- classification. The elements in a vertical column
and 5f-inner transition series of elements of the Periodic Table constitute a group or
are placed separately in the Periodic Table family and exhibit similar chemical behaviour.
to maintain its structure and to preserve the This similarity arises because these elements
principle of classification by keeping elements have the same number and same distribution
with similar properties in a single column. of electrons in their outermost orbitals. We
can classify the elements into four blocks viz.,
Problem 3.2 s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block
How would you justify the presence depending on the type of atomic orbitals that
of 18 elements in the 5th period of the are being filled with electrons. This is illustrated
Periodic Table? in Fig. 3.3. We notice two exceptions to this
categorisation. Strictly, helium belongs to the
solution
s-block but its positioning in the p-block
When n = 5, l = 0, 1, 2, 3. The order
along with other group 18 elements is
in which the energy of the available
orbitals 4d, 5s and 5p increases is 5s justified because it has a completely filled
< 4d < 5p. The total number of orbitals valence shell (1s2) and as a result, exhibits
available are 9. The maximum number properties characteristic of other noble gases.
of electrons that can be accommodated The other exception is hydrogen. It has only
is 18; and therefore 18 elements are one s-electron and hence can be placed in
there in the 5th period.
group 1 (alkali metals). It can also
gain an electron to achieve a noble gas
arrangement and hence it can behave
(b) Groupwise Electronic Configurations
similar to a group 17 (halogen family)
Elements in the same vertical column or
elements. Because it is a special case, we
group have similar valence shell electronic
shall place hydrogen separately at the top of
configurations, the same number of electrons
the Periodic Table as shown in Fig. 3.2 and
in the outer orbitals, and similar properties.
Fig. 3.3. We will briefly discuss the salient
For example, the Group 1 elements (alkali
metals) all have ns1 valence shell electronic features of the four types of elements marked in
configuration as shown below. the Periodic Table. More about these elements
atomic number symbol Electronic configuration
3 Li 1s22s1 (or) [He]2s1
11 Na 1s22s22p63s1 (or) [Ne]3s1
19 K 1s22s22p63s23p64s1 (or) [Ar]4s1
37 Rb 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p65s1 (or) [Kr]5s1
55 Cs 1s22s22p63s23p63d104s24p64d105s25p66s1 (or) [Xe]6s1
87 Fr [Rn]7s1
Thus it can be seen that the properties of will be discussed later. During the description
an element have periodic dependence upon of their features certain terminology has been
its atomic number and not on relative atomic
used which has been classified in section 3.7.
mass.
3.6.1 the s-Block Elements
3.6 ElECtroniC ConfiGUrations
and tyPEs of ElEmEnts: The elements of Group 1 (alkali metals) and
S-, P-, d-, F- BloCKs Group 2 (alkaline earth metals) which have
The aufbau (build up) principle and the ns1 and ns2 outermost electronic configuration
electronic configuration of atoms provide belong to the s-Block Elements. They are all
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 82 9/9/2022 4:36:13 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 83
gO
sT
cM
hN
taht
slatibro
eht
no
desab
elbaT
cidoireP
eht
ni
stnemele
fo
sepyt
ehT
3.3
.giF
SLATEM
otni
stnemele
fo
noisivid
daorb
eht
si
nwohs
oslA
.dellfi
gnieb
era
.)
(
SDIOLLATEM
dna
)
(
SLATEM-NON
,)
(
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 83 11/2/2022 4:28:19 PM84 chemistry
reactive metals with low ionization enthalpies. valence (oxidation states), paramagnetism and
They lose the outermost electron(s) readily to oftenly used as catalysts. However, Zn, Cd and
form 1+ ion (in the case of alkali metals) or 2+ Hg which have the electronic configuration,
ion (in the case of alkaline earth metals). The (n-1) d10ns2 do not show most of the properties
metallic character and the reactivity increase of transition elements. In a way, transition
as we go down the group. Because of high metals form a bridge between the chemically
reactivity they are never found pure in nature. active metals of s-block elements and the
The compounds of the s-block elements, with less active elements of Groups 13 and 14 and
thus take their familiar name “Transition
the exception of those of lithium and beryllium
Elements”.
are predominantly ionic.
3.6.4 The f-Block Elements
3.6.2 The p-Block Elements
(Inner-Transition Elements)
The p-Block Elements comprise those
The two rows of elements at the bottom of
belonging to Group 13 to 18 and these
the Periodic Table, called the Lanthanoids,
together with the s-Block Elements are
Ce(Z = 58) – Lu(Z = 71) and Actinoids,
called the Representative Elements or Main
Th(Z = 90) – Lr (Z = 103) are characterised by
Group Elements. The outermost electronic
the outer electronic configuration (n-2)f1-14
configuration varies from ns2np1 to ns2np6 (n-1)d0–1ns2. The last electron added to each
in each period. At the end of each period is element is filled in f- orbital. These two series
a noble gas element with a closed valence of elements are hence called the Inner-
shell ns2np6 configuration. All the orbitals Transition Elements (f-Block Elements).
in the valence shell of the noble gases are They are all metals. Within each series, the
completely filled by electrons and it is very properties of the elements are quite similar.
difficult to alter this stable arrangement by The chemistry of the early actinoids is
the addition or removal of electrons. The more complicated than the corresponding
lanthanoids, due to the large number of
noble gases thus exhibit very low chemical
oxidation states possible for these actinoid
reactivity. Preceding the noble gas family
elements. Actinoid elements are radioactive.
are two chemically important groups of non-
Many of the actinoid elements have been made
metals. They are the halogens (Group 17) and
only in nanogram quantities or even less by
the chalcogens (Group 16). These two groups
nuclear reactions and their chemistry is not
of elements have highly negative electron
fully studied. The elements after uranium are
gain enthalpies and readily add one or two
called Transuranium Elements.
electrons respectively to attain the stable
noble gas configuration. The non-metallic Problem 3.3
character increases as we move from left to
The elements Z = 117 and 120 have not yet
right across a period and metallic character
been discovered. In which family/group
increases as we go down the group.
would you place these elements and
also give the electronic configuration in
3.6.3 The d-Block Elements (Transition
each case.
Elements)
Solution
These are the elements of Group 3 to 12 in
the centre of the Periodic Table. These are We see from Fig. 3.2, that element
characterised by the filling of inner d orbitals with Z = 117, would belong to the
halogen family (Group 17) and the
by electrons and are therefore referred to as
electronic configuration would be [Rn]
d-Block Elements. These elements have
5f146d107s27p5. The element with Z = 120,
the general outer electronic configuration
will be placed in Group 2 (alkaline earth
(n-1)d1-10ns0-2 except for Pd where its electronic
metals), and will have the electronic
configuration is 4d105s0.. They are all metals. configuration [Uuo]8s2.
They mostly form coloured ions, exhibit variable
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 84 11/2/2022 4:28:19 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 85
3.6.5 metals, non-metals and metalloids
solution
In addition to displaying the classification
Metallic character increases down a
of elements into s-, p-, d-, and f-blocks,
group and decreases along a period as
Fig. 3.3 shows another broad classification
we move from left to right. Hence the
of elements based on their properties. The
order of increasing metallic character
elements can be divided into metals and is: P < Si < Be < Mg < Na.
non-metals. Metals comprise more than
78% of all known elements and appear on
3.7 PEriodiC trEnds in ProPErtiEs
the left side of the Periodic table. Metals are
of ElEmEnts
usually solids at room temperature [mercury
There are many observable patterns in the
is an exception; gallium and caesium also
physical and chemical properties of elements
have very low melting points (303K and
as we descend in a group or move across a
302K, respectively)]. Metals usually have high
period in the Periodic Table. For example,
melting and boiling points. They are good
within a period, chemical reactivity tends to
conductors of heat and electricity. They are
be high in Group 1 metals, lower in elements
malleable (can be flattened into thin sheets by
towards the middle of the table, and increases
hammering) and ductile (can be drawn into
to a maximum in the Group 17 non-metals.
wires). In contrast, non-metals are located at
Likewise within a group of representative
the top right hand side of the Periodic table. metals (say alkali metals) reactivity increases
In fact, in a horizontal row, the property of on moving down the group, whereas within a
elements change from metallic on the left to group of non-metals (say halogens), reactivity
non-metallic on the right. Non-metals are decreases down the group. But why do the
usually solids or gases at room temperature properties of elements follow these trends?
with low melting and boiling points (boron And how can we explain periodicity? To
and carbon are exceptions). They are poor answer these questions, we must look into the
conductors of heat and electricity. Most non- theories of atomic structure and properties
metallic solids are brittle and are neither of the atom. In this section we shall discuss
malleable nor ductile. The elements become the periodic trends in certain physical and
more metallic as we go down a group; the chemical properties and try to explain them
non-metallic character increases as one goes in terms of number of electrons and energy
from left to right across the Periodic table. levels.
The change from metallic to non-metallic
3.7.1 trends in Physical Properties
character is not abrupt as shown by the thick
There are numerous physical properties of
zig-zag line in Fig. 3.3. The elements (e.g.,
elements such as melting and boiling points,
silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony and
heats of fusion and vaporization, energy
tellurium) bordering this line and running
of atomization, etc. which show periodic
diagonally across the Periodic table show
variations. However, we shall discuss the
properties that are characteristic of both
periodic trends with respect to atomic and
metals and non-metals. These elements are
ionic radii, ionization enthalpy, electron gain
called semi-metals or metalloids.
enthalpy and electronegativity.
Problem 3.4
(a) Atomic Radius
Considering the atomic number and
You can very well imagine that finding the
position in the periodic table, arrange
size of an atom is a lot more complicated than
the following elements in the increasing
measuring the radius of a ball. Do you know
order of metallic character : Si, Be, Mg,
why? Firstly, because the size of an atom
Na, P.
(~ 1.2 Å i.e., 1.2 × 10–10 m in radius) is very
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 85 9/9/2022 4:36:14 PM86 chemistry
small. Secondly, since the electron cloud The atomic radii of a few elements are listed
surrounding the atom does not have a sharp in Table 3.6. Two trends are obvious. We can
boundary, the determination of the atomic explain these trends in terms of nuclear charge
size cannot be precise. In other words, there and energy level. The atomic size generally
is no practical way by which the size of an decreases across a period as illustrated in
individual atom can be measured. However, Fig. 3.4(a) for the elements of the second
an estimate of the atomic size can be made by period. It is because within the period the
knowing the distance between the atoms in outer electrons are in the same valence shell
the combined state. One practical approach to and the effective nuclear charge increases
estimate the size of an atom of a non-metallic as the atomic number increases resulting in
element is to measure the distance between the increased attraction of electrons to the
two atoms when they are bound together
nucleus. Within a family or vertical column
by a single bond in a covalent molecule and
of the periodic table, the atomic radius
from this value, the “Covalent radius” of the
increases regularly with atomic number as
element can be calculated. For example, the
illustrated in Fig. 3.4(b). For alkali metals
bond distance in the chlorine molecule (Cl )
2 and halogens, as we descend the groups,
is 198 pm and half this distance (99 pm), is
the principal quantum number (n) increases
taken as the atomic radius of chlorine. For
and the valence electrons are farther from
metals, we define the term “metallic radius”
the nucleus. This happens because the inner
which is taken as half the internuclear
energy levels are filled with electrons, which
distance separating the metal cores in the
serve to shield the outer electrons from the
metallic crystal. For example, the distance
pull of the nucleus. Consequently the size of
between two adjacent copper atoms in solid
the atom increases as reflected in the atomic
copper is 256 pm; hence the metallic radius
radii.
of copper is assigned a value of 128 pm. For
simplicity, in this book, we use the term Note that the atomic radii of noble gases
atomic radius to refer to both covalent or are not considered here. Being monoatomic,
metallic radius depending on whether the their (non-bonded radii) values are very
element is a non-metal or a metal. Atomic large. In fact radii of noble gases should be
radii can be measured by X-ray or other compared not with the covalent radii but with
spectroscopic methods. the van der Waals radii of other elements.
table 3.6(a) atomic radii/pm across the Periods
atom (Period ii) li Be B C n o f
atomic radius 152 111 88 77 74 66 64
atom (Period iii) na mg al si P s Cl
atomic radius 186 160 143 117 110 104 99
table 3.6(b) atomic radii/pm down a family
atom atomic atom atomic
(Group i) radius (Group 17) radius
li 152 f 64
na 186 Cl 99
K 231 Br 114
rb 244 i 133
Cs 262 at 140
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 86 9/9/2022 4:36:14 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 87
Fig. 3.4 (a) Variation of atomic radius with atomic Fig. 3.4 (b) Variation of atomic radius with
number across the second period atomic number for alkali metals and
halogens
(b) Ionic Radius cation with the greater positive charge will
have a smaller radius because of the greater
The removal of an electron from an atom
attraction of the electrons to the nucleus.
results in the formation of a cation, whereas
Anion with the greater negative charge will
gain of an electron leads to an anion. The
have the larger radius. In this case, the net
ionic radii can be estimated by measuring
repulsion of the electrons will outweigh the
the distances between cations and anions
nuclear charge and the ion will expand in size.
in ionic crystals. In general, the ionic radii
of elements exhibit the same trend as the
Problem 3.5
atomic radii. A cation is smaller than its
parent atom because it has fewer electrons Which of the following species will have
while its nuclear charge remains the same. the largest and the smallest size?
Mg, Mg2+, Al, Al3+.
The size of an anion will be larger than that of
the parent atom because the addition of one solution
or more electrons would result in increased
Atomic radii decrease across a period.
repulsion among the electrons and a decrease
Cations are smaller than their parent
in effective nuclear charge. For example, the
atoms. Among isoelectronic species,
ionic radius of fluoride ion (F–) is 136 pm the one with the larger positive nuclear
whereas the atomic radius of fluorine is only charge will have a smaller radius.
64 pm. On the other hand, the atomic radius
Hence the largest species is Mg; the
of sodium is 186 pm compared to the ionic smallest one is Al3+.
radius of 95 pm for Na+.
When we find some atoms and ions which (c) Ionization Enthalpy
contain the same number of electrons, we call A quantitative measure of the tendency of
them isoelectronic species*. For example, an element to lose electron is given by its
O2–, F–, Na+ and Mg2+ have the same number ionization Enthalpy. It represents the
of electrons (10). Their radii would be different energy required to remove an electron from an
because of their different nuclear charges. The isolated gaseous atom (X) in its ground state.
* Two or more species with same number of atoms, same number of valence electrons and same structure, regardless of the
nature of elements involved.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 87 9/9/2022 4:36:14 PM88 chemistry
In other words, the first ionization enthalpy
for an element X is the enthalpy change
(∆H) for the reaction depicted in equation 3.1.
i
X(g) → X+(g) + e– (3.1)
The ionization enthalpy is expressed in
units of kJ mol–1. We can define the second
ionization enthalpy as the energy required
to remove the second most loosely bound
electron; it is the energy required to carry out
the reaction shown in equation 3.2.
X+(g) → X2+(g) + e– (3.2)
Energy is always required to remove
electrons from an atom and hence ionization Fig. 3.5 Variation of first ionization enthalpies
(∆H) with atomic number for elements
enthalpies are always positive. The second i
with Z = 1 to 60
ionization enthalpy will be higher than the
first ionization enthalpy because it is more
can be correlated with their high reactivity.
difficult to remove an electron from a positively
In addition, you will notice two trends the
charged ion than from a neutral atom. In the
first ionization enthalpy generally increases
same way the third ionization enthalpy will be
as we go across a period and decreases
higher than the second and so on. The term
as we descend in a group. These trends
“ionization enthalpy”, if not qualified, is taken
are illustrated in Figs. 3.6(a) and 3.6(b)
as the first ionization enthalpy.
respectively for the elements of the second
The first ionization enthalpies of elements period and the first group of the periodic
having atomic numbers up to 60 are plotted table. You will appreciate that the ionization
in Fig. 3.5. The periodicity of the graph is enthalpy and atomic radius are closely related
quite striking. You will find maxima at the properties. To understand these trends, we
noble gases which have closed electron shells have to consider two factors : (i) the attraction
and very stable electron configurations. On of electrons towards the nucleus, and (ii) the
the other hand, minima occur at the alkali repulsion of electrons from each other. The
metals and their low ionization enthalpies effective nuclear charge experienced by a
3.6 (a) 3.6 (b)
Fig. 3.6(a) First ionization enthalpies (∆ H) of elements of the second period as a
i
function of atomic number (Z) and Fig. 3.6(b) ∆H of alkali metals as a function of Z.
i
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 88 9/9/2022 4:36:14 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 89
valence electron in an atom will be less than the 2s electrons of beryllium. Therefore, it is
the actual charge on the nucleus because of easier to remove the 2p-electron from boron
“shielding” or “screening” of the valence compared to the removal of a 2s- electron from
electron from the nucleus by the intervening beryllium. Thus, boron has a smaller first
core electrons. For example, the 2s electron ionization enthalpy than beryllium. Another
in lithium is shielded from the nucleus by “anomaly” is the smaller first ionization
the inner core of 1s electrons. As a result, the enthalpy of oxygen compared to nitrogen. This
valence electron experiences a net positive arises because in the nitrogen atom, three
charge which is less than the actual charge 2p-electrons reside in different atomic orbitals
of +3. In general, shielding is effective when (Hund’s rule) whereas in the oxygen atom,
the orbitals in the inner shells are completely two of the four 2p-electrons must occupy the
filled. This situation occurs in the case of same 2p-orbital resulting in an increased
alkali metals which have single outermost electron-electron repulsion. Consequently,
ns-electron preceded by a noble gas electronic it is easier to remove the fourth 2p-electron
configuration. from oxygen than it is, to remove one of the
When we move from lithium to fluorine three 2p-electrons from nitrogen.
across the second period, successive electrons
are added to orbitals in the same principal Problem 3.6
quantum level and the shielding of the nuclear The first ionization enthalpy (∆H ) values
i
charge by the inner core of electrons does of the third period elements, Na, Mg and
not increase very much to compensate for Si are respectively 496, 737 and 786 kJ
the increased attraction of the electron to the mol–1. Predict whether the first ∆H value
i
nucleus. Thus, across a period, increasing for Al will be more close to 575 or 760 kJ
nuclear charge outweighs the shielding. mol–1 ? Justify your answer.
Consequently, the outermost electrons are
solution
held more and more tightly and the ionization
It will be more close to 575 kJ mol–1.
enthalpy increases across a period. As we go
The value for Al should be lower than
down a group, the outermost electron being
that of Mg because of effective shielding
increasingly farther from the nucleus, there is
of 3p electrons from the nucleus by
an increased shielding of the nuclear charge 3s-electrons.
by the electrons in the inner levels. In this
case, increase in shielding outweighs the
(d) Electron Gain Enthalpy
increasing nuclear charge and the removal of
When an electron is added to a neutral
the outermost electron requires less energy
gaseous atom (X) to convert it into a negative
down a group.
ion, the enthalpy change accompanying the
From Fig. 3.6(a), you will also notice that
process is defined as the Electron Gain
the first ionization enthalpy of boron (Z = 5)
Enthalpy (∆ H). Electron gain enthalpy
is slightly less than that of beryllium (Z = 4) eg
provides a measure of the ease with which
even though the former has a greater nuclear
an atom adds an electron to form anion as
charge. When we consider the same principal
represented by equation 3.3.
quantum level, an s-electron is attracted to the
X(g) + e– → X–(g) (3.3)
nucleus more than a p-electron. In beryllium,
the electron removed during the ionization is Depending on the element, the process
an s-electron whereas the electron removed of adding an electron to the atom can be
during ionization of boron is a p-electron. The either endothermic or exothermic. For many
penetration of a 2s-electron to the nucleus is elements energy is released when an electron
more than that of a 2p-electron; hence the 2p is added to the atom and the electron gain
electron of boron is more shielded from the enthalpy is negative. For example, group
nucleus by the inner core of electrons than 17 elements (the halogens) have very high
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 89 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PM90 chemistry
table 3.7 Electron Gain Enthalpies* / (kJ mol–1) of some main Group Elements
Group 1 ∆ H Group 16 ∆ H Group 17 ∆ H Group 0 ∆ H
eg eg eg eg
H – 73 He + 48
li – 60 o – 141 f – 328 ne + 116
na – 53 s – 200 Cl – 349 ar + 96
K – 48 se – 195 Br – 325 Kr + 96
rb – 47 te – 190 i – 295 Xe + 77
Cs – 46 Po – 174 at – 270 rn + 68
negative electron gain enthalpies because
they can attain stable noble gas electronic Problem 3.7
configurations by picking up an electron. Which of the following will have the most
On the other hand, noble gases have large negative electron gain enthalpy and
positive electron gain enthalpies because the which the least negative?
electron has to enter the next higher principal P, S, Cl, F.
quantum level leading to a very unstable Explain your answer.
electronic configuration. It may be noted that
solution
electron gain enthalpies have large negative
Electron gain enthalpy generally
values toward the upper right of the periodic
becomes more negative across a
table preceding the noble gases.
period as we move from left to right.
The variation in electron gain enthalpies of
Within a group, electron gain enthalpy
elements is less systematic than for ionization
becomes less negative down a group.
enthalpies. As a general rule, electron gain However, adding an electron to the
enthalpy becomes more negative with increase 2p-orbital leads to greater repulsion
in the atomic number across a period. The than adding an electron to the larger
effective nuclear charge increases from left to 3p-orbital. Hence the element with
right across a period and consequently it will most negative electron gain enthalpy is
be easier to add an electron to a smaller atom chlorine; the one with the least negative
since the added electron on an average would electron gain enthalpy is phosphorus.
be closer to the positively charged nucleus. We
should also expect electron gain enthalpy to
(e) Electronegativity
become less negative as we go down a group
A qualitative measure of the ability of an atom
because the size of the atom increases and
in a chemical compound to attract shared
the added electron would be farther from the
electrons to itself is called electronegativity.
nucleus. This is generally the case (Table
Unlike ionization enthalpy and electron gain
3.7). However, electron gain enthalpy of O or
enthalpy, it is not a measureable quantity.
F is less negative than that of the succeeding
However, a number of numerical scales of
element. This is because when an electron is
added to O or F, the added electron goes to electronegativity of elements viz., Pauling
the smaller n = 2 quantum level and suffers scale, Mulliken-Jaffe scale, Allred-Rochow
significant repulsion from the other electrons scale have been developed. The one which
present in this level. For the n = 3 quantum is the most widely used is the Pauling scale.
level (S or Cl), the added electron occupies Linus Pauling, an American scientist, in 1922
a larger region of space and the electron- assigned arbitrarily a value of 4.0 to fluorine,
electron repulsion is much less. the element considered to have the greatest
* In many books, the negative of the enthalpy change for the process depicted in equation 3.3 is defined as the ELECTRON
AFFINITY (A ) of the atom under consideration. If energy is released when an electron is added to an atom, the electron
e
affinity is taken as positive, contrary to thermodynamic convention. If energy has to be supplied to add an electron to an
atom, then the electron affinity of the atom is assigned a negative sign. However, electron affinity is defined as absolute
zero and, therefore at any other temperature (T) heat capacities of the reactants and the products have to be taken into
account in ∆ H = –A – 5/2 RT.
eg e
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 90 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 91
ability to attract electrons. Approximate On the same account electronegativity values
values for the electronegativity of a few decrease with the increase in atomic radii
elements are given in Table 3.8(a) down a group. The trend is similar to that of
ionization enthalpy.
The electronegativity of any given element
Knowing the relationship between
is not constant; it varies depending on the
electronegativity and atomic radius, can
element to which it is bound. Though it is
you now visualise the relationship between
not a measurable quantity, it does provide a
electronegativity and non-metallic properties?
means of predicting the nature of force that
Non-metallic elements have strong tendency
holds a pair of atoms together – a relationship
that you will explore later.
Electronegativity generally
increases across a period from
left to right (say from lithium to
fluorine) and decrease down a group
(say from fluorine to astatine)
in the periodic table. How can
these trends be explained?
Can the electronegativity be
related to atomic radii, which
tend to decrease across each
period from left to right, but
increase down each group ? The
attraction between the outer
(or valence) electrons and the
nucleus increases as the atomic
radius decreases in a period. The
electronegativity also increases.
Fig. 3.7 The periodic trends of elements in the periodic table
table 3.8(a) Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) across the Periods
atom (Period ii) li Be B C n o f
Electronegativity 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5 3.0 3.5 4.0
atom (Period iii) na mg al si P s Cl
Electronegativity 0.9 1.2 1.5 1.8 2.1 2.5 3.0
table 3.8(b) Electronegativity Values (on Pauling scale) down a family
atom Electronegativity atom Electronegativity
(Group i) Value (Group 17) Value
li 1.0 f 4.0
na 0.9 Cl 3.0
K 0.8 Br 2.8
rb 0.8 i 2.5
Cs 0.7 at 2.2
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 91 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PM92 chemistry
to gain electrons. Therefore, electronegativity is with outer electronic configuration 2s22p5,
directly related to that non-metallic properties shares one electron with oxygen in the OF
2
of elements. It can be further extended to say molecule. Being highest electronegative
that the electronegativity is inversely related element, fluorine is given oxidation state
to the metallic properties of elements. Thus, –1. Since there are two fluorine atoms in
the increase in electronegativities across this molecule, oxygen with outer electronic
a period is accompanied by an increase configuration 2s22p4 shares two electrons
in non-metallic properties (or decrease in with fluorine atoms and thereby exhibits
metallic properties) of elements. Similarly, the oxidation state +2. In Na O, oxygen being
2
decrease in electronegativity down a group is more electronegative accepts two electrons,
accompanied by a decrease in non-metallic one from each of the two sodium atoms and,
properties (or increase in metallic properties) thus, shows oxidation state –2. On the other
of elements. hand sodium with electronic configuration
All these periodic trends are summarised 3s1 loses one electron to oxygen and is given
in Figure 3.7. oxidation state +1. Thus, the oxidation state
of an element in a particular compound can
3.7.2 Periodic trends in Chemical
be defined as the charge acquired by its atom
Properties
on the basis of electronegative consideration
Most of the trends in chemical properties of from other atoms in the molecule.
elements, such as diagonal relationships, inert
pair effect, effects of lanthanoid contraction Problem 3.8
etc. will be dealt with along the discussion
Using the Periodic Table, predict the
of each group in later units. In this section
formulas of compounds which might
we shall study the periodicity of the valence be formed by the following pairs of
state shown by elements and the anomalous elements; (a) silicon and bromine
properties of the second period elements (from (b) aluminium and sulphur.
lithium to fluorine).
solution
(a) Periodicity of Valence or Oxidation (a) Silicon is group 14 element with
States a valence of 4; bromine belongs to
the halogen family with a valence
The valence is the most characteristic property
of 1. Hence the formula of the
of the elements and can be understood in
compound formed would be SiBr .
terms of their electronic configurations. The 4
(b) Aluminium belongs to group
valence of representative elements is usually
13 with a valence of 3; sulphur
(though not necessarily) equal to the number
belongs to group 16 elements with
of electrons in the outermost orbitals and/or
a valence of 2. Hence, the formula
equal to eight minus the number of outermost
of the compound formed would be
electrons as shown below.
Al S .
2 3
Nowadays the term oxidation state is
Some periodic trends observed in the
frequently used for valence. Consider the
valence of elements (hydrides and oxides)
two oxygen containing compounds: OF and
2 are shown in Table 3.9. Other such periodic
Na O. The order of electronegativity of the
2 trends which occur in the chemical behaviour
three elements involved in these compounds
of the elements are discussed elsewhere in
is F > O > Na. Each of the atoms of fluorine,
Group 1 2 13 14 15 16 17 18
number of valence 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
electron
alence 1 2 3 4 3,5 2,6 1,7 0,8
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 92 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 93
table 3.9 Periodic trends in Valence of Elements as shown by the formulas of their
Compounds
Group 1 2 13 14 15 16 17
Formula of LiH CaH B H CH NH H O HF
2 2 6 4 3 2
hydride
NaH AlH SiH PH H S HCl
3 4 3 2
KH GeH AsH H Se HBr
4 3 2
SnH H Te HI
4 2
Formula Li O MgO B O CO N O , N O –
2 2 3 2 2 3 2 5
of oxide Na O CaO Al O SiO P O , P O SO Cl O
2 2 3 2 4 6 4 10 3 2 7
SrO
K O Ga O GeO As O , As O SeO –
2 2 3 2 2 3 2 5 3
BaO
In O SnO Sb O , Sb O TeO –
2 3 2 2 3 2 5 3
PbO Bi O – –
2 2 3
this book. There are many elements which the second element of the following group
exhibit variable valence. This is particularly i.e., magnesium and aluminium, respectively.
characteristic of transition elements and This sort of similarity is commonly referred
actinoids, which we shall study later. to as diagonal relationship in the periodic
properties.
(b) Anomalous Properties of Second
Period Elements What are the reasons for the different
chemical behaviour of the first member of
The first element of each of the groups 1
a group of elements in the s- and p-blocks
(lithium) and 2 (beryllium) and groups 13-17
compared to that of the subsequent members
(boron to fluorine) differs in many respects
in the same group? The anomalous behaviour
from the other members of their respective
is attributed to their small size, large charge/
group. For example, lithium unlike other
radius ratio and high electronegativity of the
alkali metals, and beryllium unlike other
elements. In addition, the first member of
alkaline earth metals, form compounds with
group has only four valence orbitals (2s and
pronounced covalent character; the other
2p) available for bonding, whereas the second
members of these groups predominantly
member of the groups have nine valence
form ionic compounds. In fact the behaviour
orbitals (3s, 3p, 3d). As a consequence of
of lithium and beryllium is more similar with
this, the maximum covalency of the first
member of each group is 4 (e.g., boron
Property Element
can only form
BF 
, whereas the other
4
members of the groups can expand their
Metallic radius M/pm li Be B
valence shell to accommodate more than
152 111 88 four pairs of electrons e.g., aluminium
na mg al AlF 3 forms). Furthermore, the first
6
186 160 143 member of p-block elements displays
greater ability to form p – p multiple
π π
Ionic radius M+/pm li Be bonds to itself (e.g., C = C, C ≡ C,
76 31 N = N, N ≡ Ν) and to other second period
na mg elements (e.g., C = O, C = N, C ≡ N,
N = O) compared to subsequent members
102 72
of the same group.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 93 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PM94 chemistry
here it can be directly related to the metallic
Problem 3.9
and non-metallic character of elements. Thus,
Are the oxidation state and covalency of the metallic character of an element, which
Al in [AlCl(H O) ]2+ same ?
is highest at the extremely left decreases and
2 5
solution the non-metallic character increases while
moving from left to right across the period.
No. The oxidation state of Al is +3 and
the covalency is 6. The chemical reactivity of an element can be
best shown by its reactions with oxygen and
3.7.3 Periodic trends and Chemical halogens. Here, we shall consider the reaction
reactivity of the elements with oxygen only. Elements
on two extremes of a period easily combine
We have observed the periodic trends in
with oxygen to form oxides. The normal oxide
certain fundamental properties such as
formed by the element on extreme left is the
atomic and ionic radii, ionization enthalpy,
most basic (e.g., Na O), whereas that formed
electron gain enthalpy and valence. We
2
know by now that the periodicity is related to by the element on extreme right is the most
electronic configuration. That is, all chemical acidic (e.g., Cl O ). Oxides of elements in the
2 7
and physical properties are a manifestation of centre are amphoteric (e.g., Al O ,As O ) or
2 3 2 3
the electronic configuration of elements. We neutral (e.g., CO, NO, N O). Amphoteric oxides
2
shall now try to explore relationships between behave as acidic with bases and as basic with
these fundamental properties of elements with acids, whereas neutral oxides have no acidic
their chemical reactivity. or basic properties.
The atomic and ionic radii, as we know,
Problem 3.10
generally decrease in a period from left to right.
As a consequence, the ionization enthalpies Show by a chemical reaction with water
that Na O is a basic oxide and Cl O is
generally increase (with some exceptions as 2 2 7
an acidic oxide.
outlined in section 3.7.1(a)) and electron gain
enthalpies become more negative across a solution
period. In other words, the ionization enthalpy Na O with water forms a strong base
2
of the extreme left element in a period is the whereas Cl O forms strong acid.
2 7
least and the electron gain enthalpy of the Na O + H O → 2NaOH
2 2
element on the extreme right is the highest Cl O + H O → 2HClO
2 7 2 4
negative (note : noble gases having completely
Their basic or acidic nature can be
filled shells have rather positive electron
qualitatively tested with litmus paper.
gain enthalpy values). This results into high
chemical reactivity at the two extremes and
the lowest in the centre. Thus, the maximum Among transition metals (3d series), the
chemical reactivity at the extreme left (among change in atomic radii is much smaller as
alkali metals) is exhibited by the loss of an compared to those of representative elements
electron leading to the formation of a cation across the period. The change in atomic radii
and at the extreme right (among halogens) is still smaller among inner-transition metals
shown by the gain of an electron forming (4f series). The ionization enthalpies are
an anion. This property can be related with intermediate between those of s- and p-blocks.
the reducing and oxidizing behaviour of the As a consequence, they are less electropositive
elements which you will learn later. However, than group 1 and 2 metals.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 94 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 95
In a group, the increase in atomic and increases down the group and non-metallic
ionic radii with increase in atomic number character decreases. This trend can be related
generally results in a gradual decrease in with their reducing and oxidizing property
ionization enthalpies and a regular decrease which you will learn later. In the case of
(with exception in some third period elements transition elements, however, a reverse trend
as shown in section 3.7.1(d)) in electron is observed. This can be explained in terms of
gain enthalpies in the case of main group atomic size and ionization enthalpy.
elements. Thus, the metallic character
sUmmary
In this Unit, you have studied the development of the Periodic law and the Periodic table.
Mendeleev’s Periodic table was based on atomic masses. Modern Periodic table arranges
the elements in the order of their atomic numbers in seven horizontal rows (periods) and
eighteen vertical columns (groups or families). Atomic numbers in a period are consecutive,
whereas in a group they increase in a pattern. Elements of the same group have similar
valence shell electronic configuration and, therefore, exhibit similar chemical properties.
However, the elements of the same period have incrementally increasing number of electrons
from left to right, and, therefore, have different valencies. Four types of elements can be
recognized in the periodic table on the basis of their electronic configurations. These are
s-block, p-block, d-block and f-block elements. Hydrogen with one electron in the 1s orbital
occupies a unique position in the periodic table. metals comprise more than seventy eight
per cent of the known elements. non-metals, which are located at the top of the periodic
table, are less than twenty in number. Elements which lie at the border line between metals
and non-metals (e.g., Si, Ge, As) are called metalloids or semi-metals. Metallic character
increases with increasing atomic number in a group whereas decreases from left to right
in a period. The physical and chemical properties of elements vary periodically with their
atomic numbers.
Periodic trends are observed in atomic sizes, ionization enthalpies, electron gain
enthalpies, electronegativity and valence. The atomic radii decrease while going from
left to right in a period and increase with atomic number in a group. Ionization enthalpies
generally increase across a period and decrease down a group. Electronegativity also shows
a similar trend. Electron gain enthalpies, in general, become more negative across a period
and less negative down a group. There is some periodicity in valence, for example, among
representative elements, the valence is either equal to the number of electrons in the
outermost orbitals or eight minus this number. Chemical reactivity is highest at the two
extremes of a period and is lowest in the centre. The reactivity on the left extreme of a period
is because of the ease of electron loss (or low ionization enthalpy). Highly reactive elements
do not occur in nature in free state; they usually occur in the combined form. Oxides formed
of the elements on the left are basic and of the elements on the right are acidic in nature.
Oxides of elements in the centre are amphoteric or neutral.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 95 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PM96 chemistry
EXErCisEs
3.1 What is the basic theme of organisation in the periodic table?
3.2 Which important property did Mendeleev use to classify the elements in his periodic
table and did he stick to that?
3.3 What is the basic difference in approach between the Mendeleev’s Periodic Law and
the Modern Periodic Law?
3.4 On the basis of quantum numbers, justify that the sixth period of the periodic table
should have 32 elements.
3.5 In terms of period and group where would you locate the element with Z =114?
3.6 Write the atomic number of the element present in the third period and seventeenth
group of the periodic table.
3.7 Which element do you think would have been named by
(i) Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
(ii) Seaborg’s group?
3.8 Why do elements in the same group have similar physical and chemical properties?
3.9 What does atomic radius and ionic radius really mean to you?
3.10 How do atomic radius vary in a period and in a group? How do you explain the
variation?
3.11 What do you understand by isoelectronic species? Name a species that will be
isoelectronic with each of the following atoms or ions.
(i) F– (ii) Ar (iii) Mg2+ (iv) Rb+
3.12 Consider the following species :
N3–, O2–, F–, Na+, Mg2+ and Al3+
(a) What is common in them?
(b) Arrange them in the order of increasing ionic radii.
3.13 Explain why cation are smaller and anions larger in radii than their parent atoms?
3.14 What is the significance of the terms — ‘isolated gaseous atom’ and ‘ground state’
while defining the ionization enthalpy and electron gain enthalpy?
Hint : Requirements for comparison purposes.
3.15 Energy of an electron in the ground state of the hydrogen atom is
–2.18×10–18J. Calculate the ionization enthalpy of atomic hydrogen in terms of
J mol–1.
Hint: Apply the idea of mole concept to derive the answer.
3.16 Among the second period elements the actual ionization enthalpies are in the order
Li < B < Be < C < O < N < F < Ne.
Explain why
(i) Be has higher ∆ H than B
i
(ii) O has lower ∆ H than N and F?
i
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 96 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 97
3.17 How would you explain the fact that the first ionization enthalpy of sodium is lower
than that of magnesium but its second ionization enthalpy is higher than that of
magnesium?
3.18 What are the various factors due to which the ionization enthalpy of the main group
elements tends to decrease down a group?
3.19 The first ionization enthalpy values (in kJ mol–1) of group 13 elements are :
B Al Ga In Tl
801 577 579 558 589
How would you explain this deviation from the general trend ?
3.20 Which of the following pairs of elements would have a more negative electron gain
enthalpy?
(i) O or F (ii) F or Cl
3.21 Would you expect the second electron gain enthalpy of O as positive, more negative
or less negative than the first? Justify your answer.
3.22 What is the basic difference between the terms electron gain enthalpy and
electronegativity?
3.23 How would you react to the statement that the electronegativity of N on Pauling
scale is 3.0 in all the nitrogen compounds?
3.24 Describe the theory associated with the radius of an atom as it
(a) gains an electron
(b) loses an electron
3.25 Would you expect the first ionization enthalpies for two isotopes of the same element
to be the same or different? Justify your answer.
3.26 What are the major differences between metals and non-metals?
3.27 Use the periodic table to answer the following questions.
(a) Identify an element with five electrons in the outer subshell.
(b) Identify an element that would tend to lose two electrons.
(c) Identify an element that would tend to gain two electrons.
(d) Identify the group having metal, non-metal, liquid as well as gas at the room
temperature.
3.28 The increasing order of reactivity among group 1 elements is Li < Na < K < Rb <Cs
whereas that among group 17 elements is F > CI > Br > I. Explain.
3.29 Write the general outer electronic configuration of s-, p-, d- and f- block elements.
3.30 Assign the position of the element having outer electronic configuration
(i) ns2np4 for n=3 (ii) (n-1)d2ns2 for n=4, and (iii) (n-2) f 7 (n-1)d1ns2 for n=6, in the
periodic table.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 97 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PM98 chemistry
3.31 The first (∆H ) and the second (∆H ) ionization enthalpies (in kJ mol–1) and the (∆ H)
i 1 i 2 eg
electron gain enthalpy (in kJ mol–1) of a few elements are given below:
Elements ∆H ∆H ∆ H
1 2 eg
I 520 7300 –60
II 419 3051 –48
III 1681 3374 –328
IV 1008 1846 –295
V 2372 5251 +48
VI 738 1451 –40
Which of the above elements is likely to be :
(a) the least reactive element.
(b) the most reactive metal.
(c) the most reactive non-metal.
(d) the least reactive non-metal.
(e) the metal which can form a stable binary halide of the formula MX (X=halogen).
2
(f) the metal which can form a predominantly stable covalent halide of the formula
MX (X=halogen)?
3.32 Predict the formulas of the stable binary compounds that would be formed by the
combination of the following pairs of elements.
(a) Lithium and oxygen (b) Magnesium and nitrogen
(c) Aluminium and iodine (d) Silicon and oxygen
(e) Phosphorus and fluorine (f) Element 71 and fluorine
3.33 In the modern periodic table, the period indicates the value of :
(a) atomic number
(b) atomic mass
(c) principal quantum number
(d) azimuthal quantum number.
3.34 Which of the following statements related to the modern periodic table is incorrect?
(a) The p-block has 6 columns, because a maximum of 6 electrons can occupy all
the orbitals in a p-shell.
(b) The d-block has 8 columns, because a maximum of 8 electrons can occupy all
the orbitals in a d-subshell.
(c) Each block contains a number of columns equal to the number of electrons that
can occupy that subshell.
(d) The block indicates value of azimuthal quantum number (l) for the last subshell
that received electrons in building up the electronic configuration.
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 98 9/9/2022 4:36:15 PMClassifiCation of ElEmEnts and PEriodiCity in ProPErtiEs 99
3.35 Anything that influences the valence electrons will affect the chemistry of the
element. Which one of the following factors does not affect the valence shell?
(a) Valence principal quantum number (n)
(b) Nuclear charge (Z)
(c) Nuclear mass
(d) Number of core electrons.
3.36 The size of isoelectronic species — F–, Ne and Na+ is affected by
(a) nuclear charge (Z)
(b) valence principal quantum number (n)
(c) electron-electron interaction in the outer orbitals
(d) none of the factors because their size is the same.
3.37 Which one of the following statements is incorrect in relation to ionization enthalpy?
(a) Ionization enthalpy increases for each successive electron.
(b) The greatest increase in ionization enthalpy is experienced on removal of electron
from core noble gas configuration.
(c) End of valence electrons is marked by a big jump in ionization enthalpy.
(d) Removal of electron from orbitals bearing lower n value is easier than from
orbital having higher n value.
3.38 Considering the elements B, Al, Mg, and K, the correct order of their metallic
character is :
(a) B > Al > Mg > K (b) Al > Mg > B > K
(c) Mg > Al > K > B (d) K > Mg > Al > B
3.39 Considering the elements B, C, N, F, and Si, the correct order of their non-metallic
character is :
(a) B > C > Si > N > F (b) Si > C > B > N > F
(c) F > N > C > B > Si (d) F > N > C > Si > B
3.40 Considering the elements F, Cl, O and N, the correct order of their chemical reactivity
in terms of oxidizing property is :
(a) F > Cl > O > N (b) F > O > Cl > N
(c) Cl > F > O > N (d) O > F > N > Cl
2024-25
Unit 3.indd 99 9/9/2022 4:36:16 PM