Unit 2
strUctUre of atom
The rich diversity of chemical behaviour of different
objectives elements can be traced to the differences in the internal
structure of atoms of these elements.
After studying this unit you will be
able to
• know about the discovery of The existence of atoms has been proposed since the time
electron, proton and neutron and of early Indian and Greek philosophers (400 B.C.) who
their characteristics; were of the view that atoms are the fundamental building
• describe Thomson, Rutherford blocks of matter. According to them, the continued
and Bohr atomic models; subdivisions of matter would ultimately yield atoms
which would not be further divisible. The word ‘atom’
• understand the important features
has been derived from the Greek word ‘a-tomio’ which
of the quantum mechanical model
means ‘uncut-able’ or ‘non-divisible’. These earlier ideas
of atom;
were mere speculations and there was no way to test
• understand nature of them experimentally. These ideas remained dormant for
electromagnetic radiation and a very long time and were revived again by scientists in
Planck’s quantum theory; the nineteenth century.
• explain the photoelectric effect The atomic theory of matter was first proposed
and describe features of atomic on a firm scientific basis by John Dalton, a British
spectra;
school teacher in 1808. His theory, called Dalton’s
• state the de Broglie relation and atomic theory, regarded the atom as the ultimate
Heisenberg uncertainty principle; particle of matter (Unit 1). Dalton’s atomic theory was
able to explain the law of conservation of mass, law of
• define an atomic orbital in terms
constant composition and law of multiple proportion
of quantum numbers;
very successfully. However, it failed to explain the results
• state aufbau principle, Pauli of many experiments, for example, it was known that
exclusion principle and Hund’s substances like glass or ebonite when rubbed with silk
rule of maximum multiplicity; and or fur get electrically charged.
• write the electronic configurations In this unit we start with the experimental observations
of atoms. made by scientists towards the end of nineteenth and
beginning of twentieth century. These established that
atoms are made of sub-atomic particles, i.e., electrons,
protons and neutrons — a concept very different from
that of Dalton.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 29 9/9/2022 4:28:07 PM30 chemistry
2.1 Discovery of sUb-atomic
Particles
An insight into the structure of atom was
obtained from the experiments on electrical
discharge through gases. Before we discuss
these results we need to keep in mind a
basic rule regarding the behaviour of charged
particles : “Like charges repel each other and
unlike charges attract each other”. Fig. 2.1(a) A cathode ray discharge tube
2.1.1 Discovery of electron
In 1830, Michael Faraday showed that if
electricity is passed through a solution of an
electrolyte, chemical reactions occurred at the
electrodes, which resulted in the liberation
and deposition of matter at the electrodes.
He formulated certain laws which you will
study in Class XII. These results suggested
the particulate nature of electricity.
Fig. 2.1(b) A cathode ray discharge tube with
In mid 1850s many scientists mainly perforated anode
Faraday began to study electrical discharge
in partially evacuated tubes, known as The results of these experiments are
cathode ray discharge tubes. It is depicted summarised below.
(i) The cathode rays start from cathode and
in Fig. 2.1. A cathode ray tube is made of
move towards the anode.
glass containing two thin pieces of metal,
(ii) These rays themselves are not visible
called electrodes, sealed in it. The electrical
but their behaviour can be observed
discharge through the gases could be
with the help of certain kind of materials
observed only at very low pressures and at
(fluorescent or phosphorescent) which
very high voltages. The pressure of different
glow when hit by them. Television
gases could be adjusted by evacuation of the picture tubes are cathode ray tubes
glass tubes. When sufficiently high voltage and television pictures result due to
is applied across the electrodes, current fluorescence on the television screen
coated with certain fluorescent or
starts flowing through a stream of particles
phosphorescent materials.
moving in the tube from the negative
(iii) In the absence of electrical or magnetic
electrode (cathode) to the positive electrode
field, these rays travel in straight lines
(anode). These were called cathode rays or
(Fig. 2.2).
cathode ray particles. The flow of current
(iv) In the presence of electrical or magnetic
from cathode to anode was further checked
field, the behaviour of cathode rays are
by making a hole in the anode and coating
similar to that expected from negatively
the tube behind anode with phosphorescent
charged particles, suggesting that
material zinc sulphide. When these rays, the cathode rays consist of negatively
after passing through anode, strike the zinc charged particles, called electrons.
sulphide coating, a bright spot is developed (v) The characteristics of cathode rays
on the coating [Fig. 2.1(b)]. (electrons) do not depend upon the
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 30 9/9/2022 4:28:08 PMstructure of atom 31
material of electrodes and the nature of (iii) the strength of the electrical or magnetic
the gas present in the cathode ray tube. field — the deflection of electrons from its
original path increases with the increase
Thus, we can conclude that electrons are
in the voltage across the electrodes, or
basic constituent of all the atoms.
the strength of the magnetic field.
2.1.2 charge to mass ratio of electron
By carrying out accurate measurements
In 1897, British physicist J.J. Thomson
on the amount of deflections observed by
measured the ratio of electrical charge (e) to
the electrons on the electric field strength or
the mass of electron (m ) by using cathode
e magnetic field strength, Thomson was able to
ray tube and applying electrical and magnetic
determine the value of e/m as:
e
field perpendicular to each other as well as
to the path of electrons (Fig. 2.2). When only = 1.758820 × 1011 C kg–1 (2.1)
electric field is applied, the electrons deviate
from their path and hit the cathode ray tube Where m is the mass of the electron in kg
e
at point A (Fig. 2.2). Similarly when only and e is the magnitude of the charge on the
magnetic field is applied, electron strikes electron in coulomb (C). Since electrons are
the cathode ray tube at point C. By carefully negatively charged, the charge on electron
balancing the electrical and magnetic field is –e.
strength, it is possible to bring back the
2.1.3 charge on the electron
electron to the path which is followed in the
absence of electric or magnetic field and they R.A. Millikan (1868-1953) devised a method
hit the screen at point B. Thomson argued known as oil drop experiment (1906-14),
to determine the charge on the electrons.
that the amount of deviation of the particles
He found the charge on the electron to be
from their path in the presence of electrical
– 1.6 × 10–19 C. The present accepted value of
or magnetic field depends upon:
electrical charge is – 1.602176 × 10–19 C. The
(i) the magnitude of the negative charge on
mass of the electron (m ) was determined by
the particle, greater the magnitude of e
combining these results with Thomson’s value
the charge on the particle, greater is the
of e/m ratio.
interaction with the electric or magnetic e
field and thus greater is the deflection.
(ii) the mass of the particle — lighter the
particle, greater the deflection. = 9.1094×10–31 kg (2.2)
Fig. 2.2 The apparatus to determine the charge to the mass ratio of electron
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 31 9/9/2022 4:28:08 PM32 chemistry
2.1.4 Discovery of Protons and neutrons
millikan’s oil Drop method
Electrical discharge carried out in the modified
cathode ray tube led to the discovery of canal In this method, oil droplets in the form of
rays carrying positively charged particles. The mist, produced by the atomiser, were allowed
characteristics of these positively charged to enter through a tiny hole in the upper
particles are listed below. plate of electrical condenser. The downward
motion of these droplets was viewed through
(i) Unlike cathode rays, mass of positively
the telescope, equipped with a micrometer
charged particles depends upon the
eye piece. By measuring the rate of fall of
nature of gas present in the cathode
these droplets, Millikan was able to measure
ray tube. These are simply the positively the mass of oil droplets. The air inside the
charged gaseous ions. chamber was ionized by passing a beam of
(ii) The charge to mass ratio of the particles X-rays through it. The electrical charge on
these oil droplets was acquired by collisions
depends on the gas from which these
with gaseous ions. The fall of these charged
originate.
oil droplets can be retarded, accelerated or
(iii) Some of the positively charged particles
made stationary depending upon the charge
carry a multiple of the fundamental unit on the droplets and the polarity and strength
of electrical charge. of the voltage applied to the plate. By
(iv) The behaviour of these particles in the carefully measuring the effects of electrical
field strength on the motion of oil droplets,
magnetic or electrical field is opposite
Millikan concluded that the magnitude of
to that observed for electron or cathode
electrical charge, q, on the droplets is always
rays.
an integral multiple of the electrical charge,
The smallest and lightest positive ion e, that is, q = n e, where n = 1, 2, 3... .
was obtained from hydrogen and was called
proton. This positively charged particle was
characterised in 1919. Later, a need was felt
for the presence of electrically neutral particle
as one of the constituent of atom. These
particles were discovered by Chadwick (1932)
by bombarding a thin sheet of beryllium
by α-particles. When electrically neutral
particles having a mass slightly greater than
that of protons were emitted. He named
these particles as neutrons. The important
properties of all these fundamental particles
are given in Table 2.1.
Fig. 2.3 The Millikan oil drop apparatus for
2.2 atomic moDels measuring charge ‘e’. In chamber,
Observations obtained from the experiments the forces acting on oil drop are:
gravitational, electrostatic due to
mentioned in the previous sections have
electrical field and a viscous drag
suggested that Dalton’s indivisible atom is
force when the oil drop is moving.
composed of sub-atomic particles carrying
positive and negative charges. The major
problems before the scientists after the • to explain the formation of different
discovery of sub-atomic particles were: kinds of molecules by the combination of
different atoms and,
• to account for the stability of atom,
• to understand the origin and nature of
• to compare the behaviour of elements
the characteristics of electromagnetic
in terms of both physical and chemical
radiation absorbed or emitted by atoms.
properties,
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 32 9/9/2022 4:28:08 PMstructure of atom 33
table 2.1 Properties of fundamental Particles
name symbol absolute relative mass/kg mass/u approx.
charge/c charge mass/u
Electron e – 1.602176×10–19 –1 9.109382×10–31 0.00054 0
Proton p + 1.602176×10–19 +1 1.6726216×10–27 1.00727 1
Neutron n 0 0 1.674927×10–27 1.00867 1
Different atomic models were proposed
to explain the distributions of these charged In the later half of the nineteenth century
particles in an atom. Although some of these different kinds of rays were discovered,
models were not able to explain the stability besides those mentioned earlier. Wilhalm
of atoms, two of these models, one proposed Röentgen (1845-1923) in 1895 showed
by J.J. Thomson and the other proposed by that when electrons strike a material in
Ernest Rutherford are discussed below. the cathode ray tubes, produce rays which
can cause fluorescence in the fluorescent
2.2.1 thomson model of atom
materials placed outside the cathode ray
J. J. Thomson, in 1898, proposed that an
tubes. Since Röentgen did not know the
atom possesses a spherical shape (radius
nature of the radiation, he named them
approximately 10–10 m) in which the positive
X-rays and the name is still carried on. It was
charge is uniformly distributed. The electrons
noticed that X-rays are produced effectively
are embedded into it in such a manner as to
when electrons strike the dense metal anode,
give the most stable electrostatic arrangement
(Fig. 2.4). Many different names are given called targets. These are not deflected by the
to this model, for example, plum pudding, electric and magnetic fields and have a very
raisin pudding or watermelon. This model high penetrating power through the matter
and that is the reason that these rays are
used to study the interior of the objects.
These rays are of very short wavelengths
(∼0.1 nm) and possess electro-magnetic
character (Section 2.3.1).
Henri Becqueral (1852-1908) observed
that there are certain elements which emit
radiation on their own and named this
Fig.2.4 Thomson model of atom phenomenon as radioactivity and the
can be visualised as a pudding or watermelon elements known as radioactive elements.
of positive charge with plums or seeds This field was developed by Marie Curie,
(electrons) embedded into it. An important Piere Curie, Rutherford and Fredrick Soddy.
feature of this model is that the mass of the It was observed that three kinds of rays i.e.,
atom is assumed to be uniformly distributed α, β- and γ-rays are emitted. Rutherford
over the atom. Although this model was able found that α-rays consists of high energy
to explain the overall neutrality of the atom,
particles carrying two units of positive charge
but was not consistent with the results of later
and four unit of atomic mass. He concluded
experiments. Thomson was awarded Nobel
that α- particles are helium nuclei as when α-
Prize for physics in 1906, for his theoretical
particles combined with two electrons yielded
and experimental investigations on the
helium gas. β-rays are negatively charged
conduction of electricity by gases.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 33 9/9/2022 4:28:08 PM34 chemistry
represented in Fig. 2.5. A stream of high
particles similar to electrons. The γ-rays energy α–particles from a radioactive source
are high energy radiations like X-rays, are was directed at a thin foil (thickness ∼ 100 nm)
neutral in nature and do not consist of
of gold metal. The thin gold foil had a circular
particles. As regards penetrating power,
fluorescent zinc sulphide screen around it.
α-particles are the least, followed by β-rays Whenever α–particles struck the screen, a
(100 times that of α–particles) and γ-rays
tiny flash of light was produced at that point.
(1000 times of that α-particles).
The results of scattering experiment were
quite unexpected. According to Thomson
model of atom, the mass of each gold atom
2.2.2 rutherford’s nuclear model of atom
in the foil should have been spread evenly
Rutherford and his students (Hans Geiger
over the entire atom, and α–particles had
and Ernest Marsden) bombarded very thin
enough energy to pass directly through such a
gold foil with α–particles. Rutherford’s famous
uniform distribution of mass. It was expected
–particle scattering experiment is
that the particles would slow down and
change directions only by a small angles as
they passed through the foil. It was observed
that:
(i) most of the α–particles passed through
the gold foil undeflected.
(ii) a small fraction of the α–particles was
deflected by small angles.
(iii) a very few α–particles (∼1 in 20,000)
bounced back, that is, were deflected by
A. Rutherford’s scattering experiment nearly 180°.
On the basis of the observations,
Rutherford drew the following conclusions
regarding the structure of atom:
(i) Most of the space in the atom is empty as
most of the α–particles passed through
the foil undeflected.
(ii) A few positively charged α–particles were
deflected. The deflection must be due
to enormous repulsive force showing
that the positive charge of the atom
is not spread throughout the atom as
Thomson had presumed. The positive
charge has to be concentrated in a very
small volume that repelled and deflected
the positively charged α–particles.
B. Schematic molecular view of the gold foil
(iii) Calculations by Rutherford showed that
the volume occupied by the nucleus
Fig. 2.5 Schematic view of Rutherford’s
is negligibly small as compared to the
scattering experiment. When a beam
total volume of the atom. The radius of
of alpha () particles is “shot” at a thin
gold foil, most of them pass through the atom is about 10–10 m, while that of
without much effect. Some, however, nucleus is 10–15 m. One can appreciate
are deflected. this difference in size by realising that if
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 34 9/9/2022 4:28:08 PMstructure of atom 35
a cricket ball represents a nucleus, then The total number of nucleons is termed as
the radius of atom would be about 5 km. mass number (a) of the atom.
On the basis of above observations and mass number (a) = number of protons (Z)
conclusions, Rutherford proposed the nuclear + number of
model of atom. According to this model: neutrons (n) (2.4)
(i) The positive charge and most of the mass 2.2.4 isobars and isotopes
of the atom was densely concentrated in
The composition of any atom can be
extremely small region. This very small
represented by using the normal element
portion of the atom was called nucleus
symbol (X) with super-script on the left hand
by Rutherford.
side as the atomic mass number (A) and
(ii) The nucleus is surrounded by electrons subscript (Z) on the left hand side as the
that move around the nucleus with a atomic number (i.e., A X).
Z
very high speed in circular paths called
Isobars are the atoms with same mass
orbits. Thus, Rutherford’s model of atom
number but different atomic number for
resembles the solar system in which the
example, 14C and 14N. On the other hand,
nucleus plays the role of sun and the 6 7
atoms with identical atomic number but
electrons that of revolving planets.
different atomic mass number are known
(iii) Electrons and the nucleus are held
as isotopes. In other words (according to
together by electrostatic forces of
equation 2.4), it is evident that difference
attraction.
between the isotopes is due to the presence
2.2.3 atomic number and mass number of different number of neutrons present in
the nucleus. For example, considering of
The presence of positive charge on the nucleus
is due to the protons in the nucleus. As hydrogen atom again, 99.985% of hydrogen
established earlier, the charge on the proton atoms contain only one proton. This isotope is
is equal but opposite to that of electron. The called protium (1H). Rest of the percentage of
1
number of protons present in the nucleus is hydrogen atom contains two other isotopes,
equal to atomic number (Z ). For example, the the one containing 1 proton and 1 neutron
number of protons in the hydrogen nucleus is called deuterium (2D, 0.015%) and the
1
is 1, in sodium atom it is 11, therefore their other one possessing 1 proton and 2 neutrons
atomic numbers are 1 and 11 respectively. is called tritium (3t ). The latter isotope is
1
In order to keep the electrical neutrality, found in trace amounts on the earth. Other
the number of electrons in an atom is equal
examples of commonly occuring isotopes are:
to the number of protons (atomic number,
carbon atoms containing 6, 7 and 8 neutrons
Z ). For example, number of electrons in
besides 6 protons (12C, 13C, 14C); chlorine
hydrogen atom and sodium atom are 1 and 6 6 6
atoms containing 18 and 20 neutrons besides
11 respectively.
17 protons (35Cl, 37Cl).
17 17
atomic number (Z) = number of protons in
Lastly an important point to mention
the nucleus of an atom
regarding isotopes is that chemical properties
= number of electrons
of atoms are controlled by the number of
in a nuetral atom (2.3)
electrons, which are determined by the number
While the positive charge of the nucleus of protons in the nucleus. Number of neutrons
is due to protons, the mass of the nucleus, present in the nucleus have very little effect
due to protons and neutrons. As discussed on the chemical properties of an element.
earlier protons and neutrons present in the Therefore, all the isotopes of a given element
nucleus are collectively known as nucleons. show same chemical behaviour.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 35 9/9/2022 4:28:09 PM36 chemistry
of the massive sun and the electrons being
Problem 2.1
similar to the lighter planets. When classical
Calculate the number of protons,
mechanics* is applied to the solar system, it
neutrons and electrons in 80Br.
35 shows that the planets describe well-defined
solution orbits around the sun. The gravitational force
between the planets is given by the expression
In this case, 80Br, Z = 35, A = 80, species
35  m m 
is neutral G. 1 2  where m and m are the masses,
 r2  1 2
Number of protons = number of electrons
r is the distance of separation of the masses
= Z = 35
and G is the gravitational constant. The theory
Number of neutrons = 80 – 35 = 45,
can also calculate precisely the planetary
(equation 2.4)
orbits and these are in agreement with the
Problem 2.2 experimental measurements.
The number of electrons, protons and
The similarity between the solar system
neutrons in a species are equal to 18, 16
and nuclear model suggests that electrons
and 16 respectively. Assign the proper
should move around the nucleus in well
symbol to the species.
defined orbits. Further, the coulomb force
solution (kq q /r2 where q and q are the charges, r
1 2 1 2
is the distance of separation of the charges
The atomic number is equal to
and k is the proportionality constant) between
number of protons = 16. The element is
electron and the nucleus is mathematically
sulphur (S).
similar to the gravitational force. However,
Atomic mass number = number of
when a body is moving in an orbit, it
protons + number of neutrons
undergoes acceleration even if it is moving
= 16 + 16 = 32
with a constant speed in an orbit because
Species is not neutral as the number of
of changing direction. So an electron in the
protons is not equal to electrons. It is
nuclear model describing planet like orbits
anion (negatively charged) with charge
is under acceleration. According to the
equal to excess electrons = 18 – 16 = 2.
electromagnetic theory of Maxwell, charged
Symbol is .
particles when accelerated should emit
note : Before using the notation A Z X, electromagnetic radiation (This feature does
find out whether the species is a neutral
not exist for planets since they are uncharged).
atom, a cation or an anion. If it is a
Therefore, an electron in an orbit will emit
neutral atom, equation (2.3) is valid, i.e.,
radiation, the energy carried by radiation
number of protons = number of electrons
comes from electronic motion. The orbit will
= atomic number. If the species is an
thus continue to shrink. Calculations show
ion, determine whether the number of
that it should take an electron only 10–8 s
protons are larger (cation, positive ion)
to spiral into the nucleus. But this does
or smaller (anion, negative ion) than the
number of electrons. Number of neutrons not happen. Thus, the Rutherford model
is always given by A–Z, whether the cannot explain the stability of an atom.
species is neutral or ion. If the motion of an electron is described on
the basis of the classical mechanics and
2.2.5 Drawbacks of rutherford model
electromagnetic theory, you may ask that
As you have learnt above, Rutherford nuclear since the motion of electrons in orbits is
model of an atom is like a small scale solar leading to the instability of the atom, then
system with the nucleus playing the role why not consider electrons as stationary
* Classical mechanics is a theoretical science based on Newton’s laws of motion. It specifies the laws of motion of macroscopic
objects.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 36 9/9/2022 4:28:09 PMstructure of atom 37
around the nucleus. If the electrons were was developed in the early 1870’s by James
stationary, electrostatic attraction between Clerk Maxwell, which was experimentally
the dense nucleus and the electrons would confirmed later by Heinrich Hertz. Here, we
pull the electrons toward the nucleus to will learn some facts about electromagnetic
form a miniature version of Thomson’s model radiations.
of atom.
James Maxwell (1870) was the first to
Another serious drawback of the give a comprehensive explanation about the
Rutherford model is that it says nothing interaction between the charged bodies and
about distribution of the electrons around the the behaviour of electrical and magnetic
nucleus and the energies of these electrons. fields on macroscopic level. He suggested
that when electrically charged particle moves
2.3 DeveloPments leaDing to tHe
under accelaration, alternating electrical and
boHr’s moDel of atom
magnetic fields are produced and transmitted.
Historically, results observed from the studies
These fields are transmitted in the forms
of interactions of radiations with matter have
of waves called electromagnetic waves or
provided immense information regarding
electromagnetic radiation.
the structure of atoms and molecules. Neils
Light is the form of radiation known from
Bohr utilised these results to improve upon
early days and speculation about its nature
the model proposed by Rutherford. Two
dates back to remote ancient times. In earlier
developments played a major role in the
days (Newton) light was supposed to be made
formulation of Bohr’s model of atom. These
of particles (corpuscules). It was only in the
were:
19th century when wave nature of light was
(i) Dual character of the electromagnetic
established.
radiation which means that radiations
Maxwell was again the first to reveal that
possess both wave like and particle like
light waves are associated with oscillating
properties, and
electric and magnetic character (Fig. 2.6).
(ii) Experimental results regarding atomic
spectra.
First, we will discuss about the duel nature
of electromagnetic radiations. Experimental
results regarding atomic spectra will be
discussed in Section 2.4.
2.3.1 Wave nature of electromagnetic
radiation
In the mid-nineteenth century, physicists
actively studied absorption and emission of
radiation by heated objects. These are called
Fig.2.6 The electric and magnetic field
thermal radiations. They tried to find out of
components of an electromagnetic
what the thermal radiation is made. It is now wave. These components have the
a well-known fact that thermal radiations same wavelength, frequency, speed
consist of electromagnetic waves of various and amplitude, but they vibrate in two
frequencies or wavelengths. It is based on mutually perpendicular planes.
a number of modern concepts, which were
Although electromagnetic wave motion is
unknown in the mid-nineteenth century.
complex in nature, we will consider here only
First active study of thermal radiation laws
a few simple properties.
occured in the 1850’s and the theory of
(i) The oscillating electric and magnetic
electromagnetic waves and the emission of
fields produced by oscillating charged
such waves by accelerating charged particles
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 37 9/9/2022 4:28:10 PM38 chemistry
particles are perpendicular to each (iv) Different kinds of units are used to
other and both are perpendicular to the represent electromagnetic radiation.
direction of propagation of the wave.
These radiations are characterised by
Simplified picture of electromagnetic
wave is shown in Fig. 2.6. the properties, namely, frequency (ν) and
wavelength (λ).
(ii) Unlike sound waves or waves produced
in water, electromagnetic waves do The SI unit for frequency (ν) is hertz
not require medium and can move in (Hz, s–1), after Heinrich Hertz. It is defined as
vacuum.
the number of waves that pass a given point
(iii) It is now well established that there in one second.
are many types of electromagnetic
Wavelength should have the units of
radiations, which differ from one
length and as you know that the SI units of
another in wavelength (or frequency).
These constitute what is called length is meter (m). Since electromagnetic
electromagnetic spectrum (Fig. 2.7). radiation consists of different kinds of waves
Different regions of the spectrum are of much smaller wavelengths, smaller units
identified by different names. Some are used. Fig. 2.7 shows various types of
examples are: radio frequency region
electro-magnetic radiations which differ from
around 106 Hz, used for broadcasting;
one another in wavelengths and frequencies.
microwave region around 1010 Hz used
for radar; infrared region around 1013 In vaccum all types of electromagnetic
Hz used for heating; ultraviolet region radiations, regardless of wavelength, travel at
around 1016Hz a component of sun’s the same speed, i.e., 3.0 × 108 m s–1 (2.997925
radiation. The small portion around 1015 × 108 ms–1, to be precise). This is called speed
Hz, is what is ordinarily called visible
of light and is given the symbol ‘c’. The
light. It is only this part which our eyes
frequency (ν ), wavelength (λ) and velocity of
can see (or detect). Special instruments
light (c) are related by the equation (2.5).
are required to detect non-visible
radiation. c = ν λ (2.5)
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.7 (a) The spectrum of electromagnetic radiation. (b) Visible spectrum. The visible region is only
a small part of the entire spectrum.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 38 9/9/2022 4:28:10 PMstructure of atom 39
The other commonly used quantity
Frequency of red light
specially in spectroscopy, is the wavenumber
( ). It is defined as the number of wavelengths
per unit length. Its units are reciprocal of ν = = 4.00 × 1014 Hz
wavelength unit, i.e., m–1. However commonly
The range of visible spectrum is from
used unit is cm–1(not SI unit).
4.0 × 1014 to 7.5 × 1014 Hz in terms of
frequency units.
Problem 2.3
The Vividh Bharati station of All India Problem 2.5
Radio, Delhi, broadcasts on a frequency Calculate (a) wavenumber and (b)
of 1,368 kHz (kilo hertz). Calculate frequency of yellow radiation having
the wavelength of the electromagnetic wavelength 5800 Å.
radiation emitted by transmitter. Which
part of the electromagnetic spectrum solution
does it belong to? (a) Calculation of wavenumber ( )
λ=5800Å = 5800 × 10–8 cm
solution
= 5800 × 10–10 m
The wavelength, λ, is equal to c/ν, where
c is the speed of electromagnetic radiation
in vacuum and ν is the frequency.
Substituting the given values, we have
c
 
v
(b) Calculation of the frequency (ν )
2.3.2 Particle nature of electromagnetic
radiation: Planck’s Quantum
theory
This is a characteristic radiowave
wavelength. Some of the experimental phenomenon
such as diffraction* and interference** can
Problem 2.4
be explained by the wave nature of the
The wavelength range of the visible electromagnetic radiation. However, following
spectrum extends from violet (400 nm) to are some of the observations which could
red (750 nm). Express these wavelengths
not be explained with the help of even the
in frequencies (Hz). (1nm = 10–9 m)
electromagentic theory of 19th century
solution physics (known as classical physics):
Using equation 2.5, frequency of violet (i) the nature of emission of radiation from
light hot bodies (black-body radiation)
(ii) ejection of electrons from metal surface
when radiation strikes it (photoelectric
effect)
= 7.50 × 1014 Hz
(iii) variation of heat capacity of solids as a
function of temperature
* Diffraction is the bending of wave around an obstacle.
** Interference is the combination of two waves of the same or different frequencies to give a wave whose distribution at each
point in space is the algebraic or vector sum of disturbances at that point resulting from each interfering wave.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 39 9/9/2022 4:28:10 PM40 chemistry
(iv) Line spectra of atoms with special entering the hole will be reflected by the cavity
reference to hydrogen. walls and will be eventually absorbed by the
walls. A black body is also a perfect radiator of
These phenomena indicate that the system
radiant energy. Furthermore, a black body is
can take energy only in discrete amounts.
in thermal equilibrium with its surroundings.
All possible energies cannot be taken up or
It radiates same amount of energy per unit
radiated.
area as it absorbs from its surrounding in
It is noteworthy that the first concrete
any given time. The amount of light emitted
explanation for the phenomenon of the black
(intensity of radiation) from a black body
body radiation mentioned above was given
and its spectral distribution depends only
by Max Planck in 1900. Let us first try to
on its temperature. At a given temperature,
understand this phenomenon, which is given
intensity of radiation emitted increases
below:
with the increase of wavelength, reaches a
Hot objects emit electromagnetic maximum value at a given wavelength and
radiations over a wide range of wavelengths. then starts decreasing with further increase of
At high temperatures, an appreciable wavelength, as shown in Fig. 2.8. Also, as the
proportion of radiation is in the visible temperature increases, maxima of the curve
region of the spectrum. As the temperature shifts to short wavelength. Several attempts
is raised, a higher proportion of short were made to predict the intensity of radiation
wavelength (blue light) is generated. For as a function of wavelength.
example, when an iron rod is heated in a
But the results of the above experiment
furnace, it first turns to dull red and then
could not be explained satisfactorily on
progressively becomes more and more red
the basis of the wave theory of light. Max
as the temperature increases. As this is
Planck arrived at a satisfactory relationship
heated further, the radiation emitted becomes
white and then becomes blue as the
temperature becomes very high. This means
that red radiation is most intense at a
particular temperature and the blue radiation
is more intense at another temperature. This
means intensities of radiations of different
wavelengths emitted by hot body depend
upon its temperature. By late 1850’s it was
known that objects made of different material
and kept at different temperatures emit
different amount of radiation. Also, when the
surface of an object is irradiated with light
(electromagnetic radiation), a part of radiant
energy is generally reflected as such, a part Fig. 2.8 Wavelength-intensity relationship
is absorbed and a part of it is transmitted.
The reason for incomplete absorption is
that ordinary objects are as a rule imperfect
absorbers of radiation. An ideal body, which
emits and absorbs radiations of all frequencies
uniformly, is called a black body and the
radiation emitted by such a body is called
black body radiation. In practice, no such
body exists. Carbon black approximates
fairly closely to black body. A good physical
approximation to a black body is a cavity with a
tiny hole, which has no other opening. Any ray Fig. 2.8(a) Black body
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 40 9/9/2022 4:28:10 PMstructure of atom 41
by making an assumption that absorption
and emmission of radiation arises from Max Planck
(1858–1947)
oscillator i.e., atoms in the wall of black
Max Planck, a German physicist,
body. Their frequency of oscillation is
received his Ph.D in theoretical
changed by interaction with oscilators of
physics from the University of
electromagnetic radiation. Planck assumed
Munich in 1879. In 1888, he
that radiation could be sub-divided into
was appointed Director of the
discrete chunks of energy. He suggested that
Institute of Theoretical Physics
atoms and molecules could emit or absorb
at the University of Berlin.
energy only in discrete quantities and not
Planck was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics
in a continuous manner. He gave the name
in 1918 for his quantum theory. Planck also made
quantum to the smallest quantity of energy significant contributions in thermodynamics and
that can be emitted or absorbed in the form other areas of physics.
of electromagnetic radiation. The energy (E)
of a quantum of radiation is proportional Photoelectric Effect
to its frequency (ν) and is expressed by
In 1887, H. Hertz performed a very interesting
equation (2.6).
experiment in which electrons (or electric
E = hυ (2.6) current) were ejected when certain metals
(for example potassium, rubidium, caesium
The proportionality constant, ‘h’ is known
etc.) were exposed to a beam of light as shown
as Planck’s constant and has the value
in Fig. 2.9. The phenomenon is called
6.626×10–34 J s.
Photoelectric effect. The results observed
With this theory, Planck was able to explain
in this experiment were:
the distribution of intensity in the radiation
(i) The electrons are ejected from the metal
from black body as a function of frequency or
surface as soon as the beam of light
wavelength at different temperatures.
strikes the surface, i.e., there is no time
Quantisation has been compared to
lag between the striking of light beam and
standing on a staircase. A person can stand
the ejection of electrons from the metal
on any step of a staircase, but it is not possible
surface.
for him/her to stand in between the two steps.
The energy can take any one of the values (ii) The number of electrons ejected is
from the following set, but cannot take on any proportional to the intensity or brightness
values between them. of light.
E = 0, hυ, 2hυ , 3hυ....nhυ..... (iii) For each metal, there is a characteristic
minimum frequency, ν (also known
0
as threshold frequency) below which
photoelectric effect is not observed. At
a frequency ν >ν , the ejected electrons
0
come out with certain kinetic energy.
The kinetic energies of these electrons
increase with the increase of frequency
of the light used.
All the above results could not be explained
on the basis of laws of classical physics.
According to latter, the energy content of the
Fig.2.9 Equipment for studying the photoelectric
effect. Light of a particular frequency beam of light depends upon the brightness of
strikes a clean metal surface inside a the light. In other words, number of electrons
vacuum chamber. Electrons are ejected
ejected and kinetic energy associated with
from the metal and are counted by a
them should depend on the brightness of light.
detector that measures their kinetic
energy. It has been observed that though the number
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 41 9/9/2022 4:28:11 PM42 chemistry
table 2.2 values of Work function (W ) for a few metals
0
metal Li Na K Mg Cu Ag
W /ev 2.42 2.3 2.25 3.7 4.8 4.3
0
of electrons ejected does depend upon the the minimum energy required to eject the
brightness of light, the kinetic energy of the electron is hν (also called work function,
0
ejected electrons does not. For example, red W ; Table 2.2), then the difference in energy
0
light [ν = (4.3 to 4.6) × 1014 Hz] of any brightness (hν – hν ) is transferred as the kinetic energy of
0
(intensity) may shine on a piece of potassium the photoelectron. Following the conservation
metal for hours but no photoelectrons are of energy principle, the kinetic energy of the
ejected. But, as soon as even a very weak ejected electron is given by the equation 2.7.
yellow light (ν = 5.1–5.2 × 1014 Hz) shines on
the potassium metal, the photoelectric effect (2.7)
is observed. The threshold frequency (ν ) for where m is the mass of the electron and v is the
0 e
potassium metal is 5.0×1014 Hz. velocity associated with the ejected electron.
Einstein (1905) was able to explain the Lastly, a more intense beam of light consists
photoelectric effect using Planck’s quantum of larger number of photons, consequently the
theory of electromagnetic radiation as a number of electrons ejected is also larger as
starting point. compared to that in an experiment in which a
beam of weaker intensity of light is employed.
Albert Einstein, a German born
American physicist, is regarded Dual Behaviour of Electromagnetic
by many as one of the two great Radiation
physicists the world has known
The particle nature of light posed a dilemma for
(the other is Isaac Newton). His
three research papers (on special scientists. On the one hand, it could explain
relativity, Brownian motion and the black body radiation and photoelectric
the photoelectric effect) which albert einstein effect satisfactorily but on the other hand,
he published in 1905, while he (1879–1955)
it was not consistent with the known wave
was employed as a technical
assistant in a Swiss patent office in Berne have behaviour of light which could account for the
profoundly influenced the development of physics. phenomena of interference and diffraction.
He received the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1921 for
The only way to resolve the dilemma was
his explanation of the photoelectric effect.
to accept the idea that light possesses
both particle and wave-like properties, i.e.,
Shining a beam of light on to a metal
light has dual behaviour. Depending on
surface can, therefore, be viewed as shooting
the experiment, we find that light behaves
a beam of particles, the photons. When a
either as a wave or as a stream of particles.
photon of sufficient energy strikes an electron
Whenever radiation interacts with matter, it
in the atom of the metal, it transfers its energy
displays particle like properties in contrast
instantaneously to the electron during the
to the wavelike properties (interference
collision and the electron is ejected without
and diffraction), which it exhibits when it
any time lag or delay. Greater the energy
possessed by the photon, greater will be propagates. This concept was totally alien to
transfer of energy to the electron and greater the way the scientists thought about matter
the kinetic energy of the ejected electron. In and radiation and it took them a long time to
other words, kinetic energy of the ejected become convinced of its validity. It turns out,
electron is proportional to the frequency as you shall see later, that some microscopic
of the electromagnetic radiation. Since the particles like electrons also exhibit this wave-
striking photon has energy equal to hν and particle duality.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 42 9/9/2022 4:28:11 PMstructure of atom 43
Problem 2.6 solution
Calculate energy of one mole of photons The energy (E) of a 300 nm photon is
of radiation whose frequency is 5 ×1014 given by
Hz.
solution
Energy (E) of one photon is given by the
expression
= 6.626 × 10–19 J
E = hν
The energy of one mole of photons
h = 6.626 ×10–34 J s
= 6.626 ×10–19 J × 6.022 × 1023 mol–1
ν = 5×1014 s–1 (given)
= 3.99 × 105 J mol–1
E = (6.626 ×10–34 J s) × (5 ×1014 s–1)
The minimum energy needed to remove
= 3.313 ×10–19 J one mole of electrons from sodium
Energy of one mole of photons = (3.99 –1.68) 105 J mol–1
= (3.313 ×10–19 J) × (6.022 × 1023 mol–1) = 2.31 × 105 J mol–1
= 199.51 kJ mol–1 The minimum energy for one electron
Problem 2.7
A 100 watt bulb emits monochromatic
light of wavelength 400 nm. Calculate the
number of photons emitted per second This corresponds to the wavelength
by the bulb. hc
=
E
solution
6.626 10 34J s 3.0 108m s 1
=
Power of the bulb = 100 watt 3.84 10 19J
= 100 J s–1
= 517 nm
Energy of one photon E = hν = hc/λ
(This corresponds to green light)
6.6261034 J s3108 m s1
Problem 2.9
=
400109m
The threshold frequency ν for a metal is
0
7.0 ×1014 s–1. Calculate the kinetic energy
= 4.969 × 10–19 J
of an electron emitted when radiation of
Number of photons emitted frequency ν =1.0 ×1015 s–1 hits the metal.
100 J s1 solution
 2.0121020s1
4.9691019J
According to Einstein’s equation
Kinetic energy = ½ m v2=h(ν – ν )
Problem 2.8 e 0
= (6.626 × 10–34 J s) (1.0 × 1015 s–1 – 7.0
When electromagnetic radiation of
×1014 s–1)
wavelength 300 nm falls on the surface
of sodium, electrons are emitted with a = (6.626 × 10–34 J s) (10.0 × 1014 s–1 – 7.0
kinetic energy of 1.68 ×105 J mol–1. What ×1014 s–1)
is the minimum energy needed to remove
= (6.626 × 10–34 J s) × (3.0 × 1014 s–1)
an electron from sodium? What is the
maximum wavelength that will cause a = 1.988 × 10–19 J
photoelectron to be emitted?
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 43 9/9/2022 4:28:11 PM44 chemistry
2.3.3 evidence for the quantized* spectrum. A continuum of radiation is passed
electronic energy levels: atomic through a sample which absorbs radiation of
spectra certain wavelengths. The missing wavelength
The speed of light depends upon the nature which corresponds to the radiation absorbed
of the medium through which it passes. As a by the matter, leave dark spaces in the bright
result, the beam of light is deviated or refracted continuous spectrum.
from its original path as it passes from one The study of emission or absorption
medium to another. It is observed that when spectra is referred to as spectroscopy. The
a ray of white light is passed through a prism, spectrum of the visible light, as discussed
the wave with shorter wavelength bends more above, was continuous as all wavelengths (red
than the one with a longer wavelength. Since to violet) of the visible light are represented in
ordinary white light consists of waves with the spectra. The emission spectra of atoms in
all the wavelengths in the visible range, a ray the gas phase, on the other hand, do not show
of white light is spread out into a series of a continuous spread of wavelength from red
coloured bands called spectrum. The light of to violet, rather they emit light only at specific
wavelengths with dark spaces between them.
red colour which has longest wavelength is
deviated the least while the violet light, which Such spectra are called line spectra or
has shortest wavelength is deviated the most. atomic spectra because the emitted radiation
is identified by the appearance of bright lines
The spectrum of white light, that we can
see, ranges from violet at 7.50 × 1014 Hz to in the spectra (Fig. 2.10 page 45).
red at 4×1014 Hz. Such a spectrum is called line emission spectra are of great
continuous spectrum. Continuous because interest in the study of electronic structure.
violet merges into blue, blue into green and Each element has a unique line emission
so on. A similar spectrum is produced when spectrum. The characteristic lines in atomic
a rainbow forms in the sky. Remember that spectra can be used in chemical analysis to
visible light is just a small portion of the identify unknown atoms in the same way
electromagnetic radiation (Fig.2.7). When as fingerprints are used to identify people.
electromagnetic radiation interacts with The exact matching of lines of the emission
matter, atoms and molecules may absorb spectrum of the atoms of a known element
energy and reach to a higher energy state. With with the lines from an unknown sample
higher energy, these are in an unstable state. quickly establishes the identity of the latter,
For returning to their normal (more stable, German chemist, Robert Bunsen (1811-1899)
lower energy states) energy state, the atoms was one of the first investigators to use line
and molecules emit radiations in various spectra to identify elements.
Elements like rubidium (Rb), caesium (Cs)
regions of the electromagnetic spectrum.
thallium (Tl), indium (In), gallium (Ga) and
Emission and Absorption Spectra scandium (Sc) were discovered when their
The spectrum of radiation emitted by a minerals were analysed by spectroscopic
substance that has absorbed energy is called methods. The element helium (He) was
an emission spectrum. Atoms, molecules or discovered in the sun by spectroscopic method.
ions that have absorbed radiation are said Line Spectrum of Hydrogen
to be “excited”. To produce an emission
When an electric discharge is passed through
spectrum, energy is supplied to a sample by
gaseous hydrogen, the H molecules dissociate
heating it or irradiating it and the wavelength and the energetically exc2 ited hydrogen atoms
(or frequency) of the radiation emitted, as produced emit electromagnetic radiation of
the sample gives up the absorbed energy, is discrete frequencies. The hydrogen spectrum
recorded. consists of several series of lines named after
An absorption spectrum is like the their discoverers. Balmer showed in 1885
photographic negative of an emission on the basis of experimental observations
* The restriction of any property to discrete values is called quantization.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 44 9/9/2022 4:28:11 PMstructure of atom 45
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2.10 (a) Atomic emission. The light emitted by a sample of excited hydrogen atoms (or any other
element) can be passed through a prism and separated into certain discrete wavelengths. Thus an emission
spectrum, which is a photographic recording of the separated wavelengths is called as line spectrum. Any
sample of reasonable size contains an enormous number of atoms. Although a single atom can be in only
one excited state at a time, the collection of atoms contains all possible excited states. The light emitted as
these atoms fall to lower energy states is responsible for the spectrum. (b) Atomic absorption. When white
light is passed through unexcited atomic hydrogen and then through a slit and prism, the transmitted light
is lacking in intensity at the same wavelengths as are emitted in (a) The recorded absorption spectrum is
also a line spectrum and the photographic negative of the emission spectrum.
that if spectral lines are expressed in terms The value 109,677 cm–1 is called the
of wavenumber ( ), then the visible lines of rydberg constant for hydrogen. The first five
the hydrogen spectrum obey the following series of lines that correspond to n = 1, 2, 3,
1
formula: 4, 5 are known as Lyman, Balmer, Paschen,
Bracket and Pfund series, respectively,
(2.8)
Table 2.3 shows these series of transitions in
the hydrogen spectrum. Fig. 2.11 (page, 46)
where n is an integer equal to or greater than
shows the Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series
3 (i.e., n = 3,4,5,....)
of transitions for hydrogen atom.
The series of lines described by this formula
Of all the elements, hydrogen atom has
are called the balmer series. The Balmer
the simplest line spectrum. Line spectrum
series of lines are the only lines in the hydrogen
spectrum which appear in the visible region
table 2.3 the spectral lines for atomic
of the electromagnetic spectrum. The Swedish
Hydrogen
spectroscopist, Johannes Rydberg, noted
that all series of lines in the hydrogen
series n n spectral region
spectrum could be described by the following 1 2
expression : Lyman 1 2,3.... Ultraviolet
Balmer 2 3,4.... Visible
(2.9)
Paschen 3 4,5.... Infrared
where n =1,2........
1 Brackett 4 5,6.... Infrared
n = n + 1, n + 2...... Pfund 5 6,7.... Infrared
2 1 1
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 45 9/9/2022 4:28:12 PM46 chemistry
atomic structure and spectra. Bohr’s model
for hydrogen atom is based on the following
postulates:
i) The electron in the hydrogen atom can
move around the nucleus in a circular
path of fixed radius and energy. These
paths are called orbits, stationary states
or allowed energy states. These orbits
are arranged concentrically around the
nucleus.
ii) The energy of an electron in the orbit
does not change with time. However,
the electron will move from a lower
stationary state to a higher stationary
state when required amount of energy
is absorbed by the electron or energy is
emitted when electron moves from higher
stationary state to lower stationary state
(equation 2.16). The energy change does
not take place in a continuous manner.
angular momentum
Just as linear momentum is the product
Fig. 2.11 Transitions of the electron in the
of mass (m) and linear velocity (v), angular
hydrogen atom (The diagram shows the
Lyman, Balmer and Paschen series of momentum is the product of moment of
transitions) inertia (I) and angular velocity (ω). For an
electron of mass m , moving in a circular
e
becomes more and more complex for heavier path of radius r around the nucleus,
atom. There are, however, certain features angular momentum = I × ω
which are common to all line spectra, i.e.,
Since I = m r2, and ω = v/r where v is the
(i) line spectrum of element is unique and e
linear velocity,
(ii) there is regularity in the line spectrum of
∴angular momentum = m r2 × v/r = m vr
each element. The questions which arise are: e e
What are the reasons for these similarities?
iii) The frequency of radiation absorbed or
Is it something to do with the electronic
emitted when transition occurs between
structure of atoms? These are the questions
two stationary states that differ in
need to be answered. We shall find later that
energy by ∆E, is given by:
the answers to these questions provide the
key in understanding electronic structure of
(2.10)
these elements.
Where E and E are the energies of the
2.4 boHr’s moDel for HyDrogen 1 2
lower and higher allowed energy states
atom
respectively. This expression is commonly
Neils Bohr (1913) was the first to explain known as Bohr’s frequency rule.
quantitatively the general features of the
iv) The angular momentum of an electron
structure of hydrogen atom and its spectrum.
is quantised. In a given stationary state
He used Planck’s concept of quantisation
it can be expressed as in equation (2.11)
of energy. Though the theory is not the
h
modern quantum mechanics, it can still m vrn. n = 1,2,3..... (2.11)
be used to rationalize many points in the e 2
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 46 9/9/2022 4:28:13 PMstructure of atom 47
Where m is the mass of electron, v is the
e
velocity and r is the radius of the orbit in Niels Bohr
(1885–1962)
which electron is moving.
Niels Bohr, a Danish physicist
Thus an electron can move only in those received his Ph.D. from the
orbits for which its angular momentum is University of Copenhagen in
integral multiple of h/2π. That means angular 1911. He then spent a year
momentum is quantised. Radiation is emitted with J.J. Thomson and Ernest
or obsorbed only when transition of electron Rutherford in England. In 1913,
takes place from one quantised value of he returned to Copenhagen where he remained for
angular momentum to another. Therefore, the rest of his life. In 1920 he was named Director
of the Institute of theoretical Physics. After first
Maxwell’s electromagnetic theory does not
World War, Bohr worked energetically for peaceful
apply here that is why only certain fixed orbits
uses of atomic energy. He received the first Atoms
are allowed.
for Peace award in 1957. Bohr was awarded the
The details regarding the derivation of Nobel Prize in Physics in 1922.
energies of the stationary states used by Bohr,
are quite complicated and will be discussed in
higher classes. However, according to Bohr’s Fig. 2.11 depicts the energies of different
theory for hydrogen atom: stationary states or energy levels of hydrogen
a) The stationary states for electron are atom. This representation is called an energy
level diagram.
numbered n = 1,2,3.......... These integral
numbers (Section 2.6.2) are known as When the electron is free from the influence
Principal quantum numbers. of nucleus, the energy is taken as zero. The
b) The radii of the stationary states are electron in this situation is associated with the
expressed as: stationary state of Principal Quantum number
= n = ∞ and is called as ionized hydrogen atom.
r = n2 a (2.12)
n 0 When the electron is attracted by the nucleus
where a = 52.9 pm. Thus the radius of and is present in orbit n, the energy is emitted
0
the first stationary state, called the bohr and its energy is lowered. That is the reason
orbit, is 52.9 pm. Normally the electron
in the hydrogen atom is found in this
What does the negative electronic
orbit (that is n=1). As n increases the
energy (E ) for hydrogen atom mean?
value of r will increase. In other words n
the electron will be present away from The energy of the electron in a hydrogen
the nucleus. atom has a negative sign for all possible
orbits (eq. 2.13). What does this negative
c) The most important property associated
sign convey? This negative sign means
with the electron, is the energy of its
that the energy of the electron in the
stationary state. It is given by the
atom is lower than the energy of a free
expression.
electron at rest. A free electron at rest
 1  is an electron that is infinitely far away
E n R H  n2 n = 1,2,3.... (2.13) from the nucleus and is assigned the
energy value of zero. Mathematically, this
where R is called rydberg constant and
H corresponds to setting n equal to infinity
its value is 2.18×10–18 J. The energy of the
in the equation (2.13) so that E =0. As the
lowest state, also called as the ground state, is ∞
electron gets closer to the nucleus (as n
1
E
1
= –2.18×10–18 ( 12) = –2.18×10–18 J. The d vae lc ur ee a as nes d) ,
m
E on rb ee c ao nm
d
e ms ola rr eg e nr
e
i gn
a
ta ivb es .o l Tu ht ee
energy of the stationary state for n = 2, will most negative energy value is given by
n=1 which corresponds to the most stable
1
be : E = –2.18×10–18J ( ) = –0.545×10–18 orbit. We call this the ground state.
2 22 J.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 47 9/9/2022 4:28:13 PM48 chemistry
for the presence of negative sign in equation
 R   R 
( r2 e. f1 er3 e)
n
a cn ed
s
td ae tp ei c ot fs
z
i et rs
o
s et nab eril git yy
a
r ne dla nti v =e ∞to
.
the E 
n
f2H   
n
i2H  (where n
i
and n
f
d) Bohr’s theory can also be applied to stand for initial orbit and final orbits)
the ions containing only one electron,
 1 1   1 1 
similar to that present in hydrogen ∆E R   2.181018J 
H n2 n2  n2 n2
atom. For example, He+ Li2+, Be3+ and so i f i f
on. The energies of the stationary states
associated with these kinds of ions (also (2.17)
known as hydrogen like species) are The frequency (ν) associated with the
given by the expression. absorption and emission of the photon can
Z2 be evaluated by using equation (2.18)
E 2.181018 J (2.14)
n  n2
and radii by the expression
52.9(n2)
r = pm (2.15) 2.181018J  1 1 
n Z   (2.18)
6.6261034Js n2 n2
where Z is the atomic number and has i f
values 2,3 for the helium and lithium atoms
 1 1 
respectively. From the above equations, it is 3.291015  Hz (2.19)
evident that the value of energy becomes more
 n2 n2
i f
negative and that of radius becomes smaller
and in terms of wavenumbers ( )
with increase of Z. This means that electron
will be tightly bound to the nucleus.
(2.20)
e) It is also possible to calculate the
velocities of electrons moving in these
orbits. Although the precise equation 3.291015s1  1 1 
= 
is not given here, qualitatively the 3108mss  n2 n2
magnitude of velocity of electron i f
increases with increase of positive  1 1 
charge on the nucleus and decreases = 1.09677107  n2  n2 m1 (2.21)
with increase of principal quantum i f
number. In case of absorption spectrum, n > n and
f i
the term in the parenthesis is positive and
2.4.1 explanation of line spectrum of energy is absorbed. On the other hand in case
Hydrogen of emission spectrum n > n , ∆ E is negative
i f
Line spectrum observed in case of hydrogen and energy is released.
atom, as mentioned in section 2.3.3, can be
The expression (2.17) is similar to that
explained quantitatively using Bohr’s model.
used by Rydberg (2.9) derived empirically
According to assumption 2, radiation (energy)
using the experimental data available at that
is absorbed if the electron moves from the
time. Further, each spectral line, whether
orbit of smaller Principal quantum number to
in absorption or emission spectrum, can
the orbit of higher Principal quantum number,
be associated to the particular transition in
whereas the radiation (energy) is emitted if
hydrogen atom. In case of large number of
the electron moves from higher orbit to lower
hydrogen atoms, different possible transitions
orbit. The energy gap between the two orbits
can be observed and thus leading to large
is given by equation (2.16)
number of spectral lines. The brightness or
∆E = E – E (2.16) intensity of spectral lines depends upon the
f i
number of photons of same wavelength or
Combining equations (2.13) and (2.16)
frequency absorbed or emitted.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 48 9/9/2022 4:28:14 PMstructure of atom 49
2.4.2 limitations of bohr’s model
Problem 2.10
Bohr’s model of the hydrogen atom was no
What are the frequency and wavelength doubt an improvement over Rutherford’s
of a photon emitted during a transition nuclear model, as it could account for the
from n = 5 state to the n = 2 state in the stability and line spectra of hydrogen atom
hydrogen atom? and hydrogen like ions (for example, He+, Li2+,
Be3+, and so on). However, Bohr’s model was
solution
too simple to account for the following points.
Since n = 5 and n = 2, this transition
i f i) It fails to account for the finer details
gives rise to a spectral line in the visible
(doublet, that is two closely spaced lines)
region of the Balmer series. From
of the hydrogen atom spectrum observed
equation (2.17)
by using sophisticated spectroscopic
 1 1  techniques. This model is also unable
E = 2.181018J 
 52 22 to explain the spectrum of atoms
other than hydrogen, for example,
=4.581019J
helium atom which possesses only two
It is an emission energy electrons. Further, Bohr’s theory was
also unable to explain the splitting
The frequency of the photon (taking
of spectral lines in the presence of
energy in terms of magnitude) is given by
magnetic field (Zeeman effect) or an
electric field (Stark effect).
ii) It could not explain the ability of atoms
to form molecules by chemical bonds.
In other words, taking into account the
points mentioned above, one needs a better
= 6.91×1014 Hz
theory which can explain the salient features
of the structure of complex atoms.
2.5 toWarDs QUantUm mecHanical
Problem 2.11 moDel of tHe atom
Calculate the energy associated with the In view of the shortcoming of the Bohr’s
first orbit of He+. What is the radius of model, attempts were made to develop a more
this orbit? suitable and general model for atoms. Two
important developments which contributed
solution
significantly in the formulation of such a
(2.181018J)Z2 model were:
E   atom–1
n n2 1. Dual behaviour of matter,
For He+, n = 1, Z = 2 2. Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
(2.181018J)(22)
E    8.721018J 2.5.1 Dual behaviour of matter
1 12
The French physicist, de Broglie, in 1924
The radius of the orbit is given by proposed that matter, like radiation, should
equation (2.15) also exhibit dual behaviour i.e., both particle
(0.0529 nm)n2 and wavelike properties. This means that
r =
n Z just as the photon has momentum as well
as wavelength, electrons should also have
Since n = 1, and Z = 2
momentum as well as wavelength, de Broglie,
(0.0529 nm)12 from this analogy, gave the following relation
r n = 2 = 0.02645 nm between wavelength (λ) and momentum (p) of
a material particle.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 49 9/9/2022 4:28:15 PM50 chemistry
Louis de Broglie
solution
(1892 – 1987)
Louis de Broglie, a French According to de Brogile equation (2.22)
physicist, studied history
h (6.6261034Js)
as an undergraduate in the   
early 1910’s. His interest mv (0.1kg)(10 ms1)
turned to science as a result
of his assignment to radio = 6.626 × 10–34 m (J = kg m2 s–2)
communications in World
Problem 2.13
War I. He received his
Dr. Sc. from the University of Paris in 1924. The mass of an electron is 9.1×10–31 kg.
He was professor of theoretical physics at If its K.E. is 3.0×10–25 J, calculate its
the University of Paris from 1932 untill his wavelength.
retirement in 1962. He was awarded the
solution
Nobel Prize in Physics in 1929.
Since K.E. = ½ mv2
h h
2K.E.1/2 23.01025kg m2s21/2
  mv  p (2.22) v =  m  =  9.11031kg 
where m is the mass of the particle, v its
= 812 m s–1
velocity and p its momentum. de Broglie’s
prediction was confirmed experimentally when h 6.626 10 34 Js
it was found that an electron beam undergoes m v (9.1 10 31 kg)(812 ms1)
diffraction, a phenomenon characteristic of
waves. This fact has been put to use in making = 8967 × 10–10 m = 896.7 nm
an electron microscope, which is based on
Problem 2.14
the wavelike behaviour of electrons just as an
Calculate the mass of a photon with
ordinary microscope utilises the wave nature
wavelength 3.6 Å.
of light. An electron microscope is a powerful
tool in modern scientific research because it solution
achieves a magnification of about 15 million
λ = 3.6 Å = 3.6 × 10–10 m
times.
Velocity of photon = velocity of light
It needs to be noted that according to de
34
Broglie, every object in motion has a wave
character. The wavelengths associated with 10 8 1
ordinary objects are so short (because of their
= 6.135 × 10–29 kg
large masses) that their wave properties cannot
be detected. The wavelengths associated with
electrons and other subatomic particles (with
very small mass) can however be detected 2.5.2 Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle
experimentally. Results obtained from
Werner Heisenberg a German physicist in
the following problems prove these points
1927, stated uncertainty principle which is
qualitatively.
the consequence of dual behaviour of matter
and radiation. it states that it is impossible
to determine simultaneously, the exact
Problem 2.12
position and exact momentum (or velocity)
What will be the wavelength of a ball of of an electron.
mass 0.1 kg moving with a velocity of
Mathematically, it can be given as in
10 m s–1 ?
equation (2.23).
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 50 9/9/2022 4:28:16 PMstructure of atom 51
(2.23)  h
momentum photons of such light p= 
 
would change the energy of electrons by
collisions. In this process we, no doubt,
would be able to calculate the position of the
electron, but we would know very little about
where ∆x is the uncertainty in position and the velocity of the electron after the collision.
∆p (or ∆v ) is the uncertainty in momentum
x x Significance of Uncertainty Principle
(or velocity) of the particle. If the position of
One of the important implications of the
the electron is known with high degree of
Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle is that it
accuracy (∆x is small), then the velocity of the
rules out existence of definite paths or
electron will be uncertain [∆(v ) is large]. On
x trajectories of electrons and other similar
the other hand, if the velocity of the electron
particles. The trajectory of an object is
is known precisely (∆(v ) is small), then the
x determined by its location and velocity at
position of the electron will be uncertain
various moments. If we know where a body
(∆x will be large). Thus, if we carry out some
is at a particular instant and if we also know
physical measurements on the electron’s its velocity and the forces acting on it at that
position or velocity, the outcome will always instant, we can tell where the body would
depict a fuzzy or blur picture. be sometime later. We, therefore, conclude
that the position of an object and its velocity
The uncertainty principle can be best
fix its trajectory. Since for a sub-atomic
understood with the help of an example.
object such as an electron, it is not possible
Suppose you are asked to measure the
simultaneously to determine the position and
thickness of a sheet of paper with an
velocity at any given instant to an arbitrary
unmarked metrestick. Obviously, the results
degree of precision, it is not possible to talk
obtained would be extremely inaccurate
of the trajectory of an electron.
and meaningless. In order to obtain any
the effect of Heisenberg Uncertainty
accuracy, you should use an instrument
Principle is significant only for motion of
graduated in units smaller than the thickness
microscopic objects and is negligible for
of a sheet of the paper. Analogously, in order
that of macroscopic objects. This can be
to determine the position of an electron, we
seen from the following examples.
must use a meterstick calibrated in units of
If uncertainty principle is applied to an
smaller than the dimensions of electron (keep
object of mass, say about a milligram (10–6 kg),
in mind that an electron is considered as a
then
point charge and is therefore, dimensionless).
To observe an electron, we can illuminate it
with “light” or electromagnetic radiation. The
“light” used must have a wavelength smaller
than the dimensions of an electron. The high
Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) Werner Heisenberg (1901 – 1976) received his Ph.D. in
physics from the University of Munich in 1923. He then spent a year working with Max
Born at Gottingen and three years with Niels Bohr in Copenhagen. He was professor of
physics at the University of Leipzig from 1927 to 1941. During World War II, Heisenberg
was in charge of German research on the atomic bomb. After the war he was named
director of Max Planck Institute for physics in Gottingen. He was also accomplished
mountain climber. Heisenberg was awarded the Nobel Prize in Physics in 1932.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 51 9/9/2022 4:28:16 PM52 chemistry
The value of ∆v∆x obtained is extremely
small and is insignificant. Therefore, one
may say that in dealing with milligram-
sized or heavier objects, the associated
uncertainties are hardly of any real
consequence.
In the case of a microscopic object like an = 0.579×107 m s–1 (1J = 1 kg m2 s–2)
electron on the other hand. ∆v.∆x obtained is = 5.79×106 m s–1
much larger and such uncertainties are of real
Problem 2.16
consequence. For example, for an electron
whose mass is 9.11×10–31 kg., according to A golf ball has a mass of 40g, and a speed
Heisenberg uncertainty principle of 45 m/s. If the speed can be measured
within accuracy of 2%, calculate the
uncertainty in the position.
solution
The uncertainty in the speed is 2%, i.e.,
Using the equation (2.22)
It, therefore, means that if one tries to
find the exact location of the electron, say
to an uncertainty of only 10–8 m, then the
uncertainty ∆v in velocity would be
104m2s1
104ms1
108m = 1.46×10–33 m
This is nearly ~ 1018 times smaller
which is so large that the classical picture
than the diameter of a typical atomic
of electrons moving in Bohr’s orbits (fixed)
nucleus. As mentioned earlier for large
cannot hold good. it, therefore, means that particles, the uncertainty principle sets
the precise statements of the position no meaningful limit to the precision of
and momentum of electrons have to be measurements.
replaced by the statements of probability,
that the electron has at a given position
Reasons for the Failure of the Bohr Model
and momentum. this is what happens in
the quantum mechanical model of atom. One can now understand the reasons for the
failure of the Bohr model. In Bohr model,
an electron is regarded as a charged particle
Problem 2.15 moving in well defined circular orbits about
the nucleus. The wave character of the
A microscope using suitable photons is
electron is not considered in Bohr model.
employed to locate an electron in an atom
within a distance of 0.1 Å. What is the Further, an orbit is a clearly defined path
uncertainty involved in the measurement and this path can completely be defined
of its velocity? only if both the position and the velocity of
the electron are known exactly at the same
solution
time. This is not possible according to the
∆ x ∆p = or ∆ x m ∆ v Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr model
of the hydrogen atom, therefore, not only
ignores dual behaviour of matter but also
contradicts Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 52 9/9/2022 4:28:16 PMstructure of atom 53
these objects obey. When quantum mechanics
Erwin Schrödinger, an
is applied to macroscopic objects (for which
Austrian physicist received
wave like properties are insignificant) the
his Ph.D. in theoretical
results are the same as those from the
physics from the University
classical mechanics.
of Vienna in 1910. In 1927
Quantum mechanics was developed
Schrödinger succeeded Max
Planck at the University of independently in 1926 by Werner Heisenberg
Berlin at Planck’s request. and Erwin Schrödinger. Here, however, we
In 1933, Schrödinger left shall be discussing the quantum mechanics
Berlin because of his which is based on the ideas of wave motion.
Erwin Schrödinger
opposition to Hitler and The fundamental equation of quantum
(1887–1961)
Nazi policies and returned mechanics was developed by Schrödinger
to Austria in 1936. After the invasion of Austria and it won him the Nobel Prize in Physics in
by Germany, Schrödinger was forcibly removed 1933. This equation which incorporates wave-
from his professorship. He then moved to Dublin, particle duality of matter as proposed by de
Ireland where he remained for seventeen years.
Broglie is quite complex and knowledge of
Schrödinger shared the Nobel Prize for Physics
higher mathematics is needed to solve it. You
with P.A.M. Dirac in 1933.
will learn its solutions for different systems
in higher classes.
In view of these inherent weaknesses in the For a system (such as an atom or a
Bohr model, there was no point in extending molecule whose energy does not change with
Bohr model to other atoms. In fact an insight time) the schrödinger equation is written
into the structure of the atom was needed as where is a mathematical
which could account for wave-particle duality operator called Hamiltonian. Schrödinger
of matter and be consistent with Heisenberg gave a recipe of constructing this operator
uncertainty principle. This came with the from the expression for the total energy of
advent of quantum mechanics. the system. The total energy of the system
takes into account the kinetic energies of all
2.6 QUantUm mecHanical moDel of
the sub-atomic particles (electrons, nuclei),
atom attractive potential between the electrons
Classical mechanics, based on Newton’s and nuclei and repulsive potential among the
laws of motion, successfully describes the electrons and nuclei individually. Solution of
motion of all macroscopic objects such as a this equation gives E and ψ.
falling stone, orbiting planets etc., which have
Hydrogen Atom and the Schrödinger
essentially a particle-like behaviour as shown
Equation
in the previous section. However it fails when
When Schrödinger equation is solved for
applied to microscopic objects like electrons,
hydrogen atom, the solution gives the possible
atoms, molecules etc. This is mainly because
energy levels the electron can occupy and
of the fact that classical mechanics ignores
the corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) of
the concept of dual behaviour of matter
the electron associated with each energy
especially for sub-atomic particles and the
level. These quantized energy states and
uncertainty principle. The branch of science
corresponding wave functions which are
that takes into account this dual behaviour
characterized by a set of three quantum
of matter is called quantum mechanics.
numbers (principal quantum number
Quantum mechanics is a theoretical n, azimuthal quantum number l and
science that deals with the study of the magnetic quantum number m ) arise as a
l
motions of the microscopic objects that have natural consequence in the solution of the
both observable wave like and particle like Schrödinger equation. When an electron
properties. It specifies the laws of motion that is in any energy state, the wave function
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 53 9/9/2022 4:28:17 PM54 chemistry
corresponding to that energy state contains
2. The existence of quantised electronic
all information about the electron. The wave
energy levels is a direct result of the
function is a mathematical function whose
wave like properties of electrons and
value depends upon the coordinates of the
are allowed solutions of Schrödinger
electron in the atom and does not carry any
wave equation.
physical meaning. Such wave functions of
3. Both the exact position and exact
hydrogen or hydrogen like species with one velocity of an electron in an atom
electron are called atomic orbitals. Such cannot be determined simultaneously
wave functions pertaining to one-electron (Heisenberg uncertainty principle). The
species are called one-electron systems. The path of an electron in an atom therefore,
probability of finding an electron at a point can never be determined or known
within an atom is proportional to the |ψ|2 at accurately. That is why, as you shall see
later on, one talks of only probability of
that point. The quantum mechanical results
finding the electron at different points in
of the hydrogen atom successfully predict
an atom.
all aspects of the hydrogen atom spectrum
4. an atomic orbital is the wave
including some phenomena that could not be
function ψ for an electron in an atom.
explained by the Bohr model. Whenever an electron is described
by a wave function, we say that the
Application of Schrödinger equation to
electron occupies that orbital. Since
multi-electron atoms presents a difficulty: the
many such wave functions are possible
Schrödinger equation cannot be solved exactly
for an electron, there are many atomic
for a multi-electron atom. This difficulty can
orbitals in an atom. These “one electron
be overcome by using approximate methods. orbital wave functions” or orbitals form
Such calculations with the aid of modern the basis of the electronic structure
computers show that orbitals in atoms other of atoms. In each orbital, the electron
than hydrogen do not differ in any radical has a definite energy. An orbital cannot
way from the hydrogen orbitals discussed contain more than two electrons. In a
above. The principal difference lies in the multi-electron atom, the electrons are
filled in various orbitals in the order of
consequence of increased nuclear charge.
increasing energy. For each electron
Because of this all the orbitals are somewhat
of a multi-electron atom, there shall,
contracted. Further, as you shall see later (in
therefore, be an orbital wave function
subsections 2.6.3 and 2.6.4), unlike orbitals
characteristic of the orbital it occupies.
of hydrogen or hydrogen like species, whose
All the information about the electron
energies depend only on the quantum number in an atom is stored in its orbital wave
n, the energies of the orbitals in multi-electron function ψ and quantum mechanics
atoms depend on quantum numbers n and l. makes it possible to extract this
information out of ψ.
important features of the Quantum 5. The probability of finding an electron at
mechanical model of atom a point within an atom is proportional to
the square of the orbital wave function
Quantum mechanical model of atom is i.e., |ψ|2 at that point. |ψ|2 is known
the picture of the structure of the atom, as probability density and is always
which emerges from the application of positive. From the value of |ψ|2 at
the Schrödinger equation to atoms. The different points within an atom,
following are the important features of the it is possible to predict the region
quantum-mechanical model of atom: around the nucleus where electron
1. The energy of electrons in atoms is will most probably be found.
quantized (i.e., can only have certain
specific values), for example when 2.6.1 orbitals and Quantum numbers
electrons are bound to the nucleus in
A large number of orbitals are possible in
atoms.
an atom. Qualitatively these orbitals can
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 54 9/9/2022 4:28:17 PMstructure of atom 55
be distinguished by their size, shape and sub-shells in a principal shell is equal to the
orientation. An orbital of smaller size means value of n. For example in the first shell (n = 1),
there is more chance of finding the electron there is only one sub-shell which corresponds
near the nucleus. Similarly shape and to l = 0. There are two sub-shells (l = 0, 1) in
orientation mean that there is more probability the second shell (n = 2), three (l = 0, 1, 2) in
of finding the electron along certain directions third shell (n = 3) and so on. Each sub-shell is
than along others. Atomic orbitals are precisely assigned an azimuthal quantum number (l).
distinguished by what are known as quantum Sub-shells corresponding to different values
numbers. Each orbital is designated by three of l are represented by the following symbols.
quantum numbers labelled as n, l and m. Value for l : 0 1 2 3 4 5 ............
l
notation for s p d f g h ............
the principal quantum number ‘n’ is a
positive integer with value of n = 1,2,3....... sub-shell
The principal quantum number determines
Table 2.4 shows the permissible values of
the size and to large extent the energy of the
‘l ’ for a given principal quantum number and
orbital. For hydrogen atom and hydrogen like
the corresponding sub-shell notation.
species (He+, Li2+, .... etc.) energy and size of
the orbital depends only on ‘n’. table 2.4 subshell notations
The principal quantum number also
n l subshell notation
identifies the shell. With the increase in the
value of ‘n’, the number of allowed orbital 1 0 1s
increases and are given by ‘n2’ all the
2 0 2s
orbitals of a given value of ‘n’ constitute
a single shell of atom and are represented 2 1 2p
by the following letters
3 0 3s
n = 1 2 3 4 ............
3 1 3p
Shell = K L M N ............
3 2 3d
Size of an orbital increases with increase of
principal quantum number ‘n’. In other words 4 0 4s
the electron will be located away from the
4 1 4p
nucleus. Since energy is required in shifting
away the negatively charged electron from the 4 2 4d
positively charged nucleus, the energy of the
4 3 4f
orbital will increase with increase of n.
azimuthal quantum number. ‘l’ is also magnetic orbital quantum number.
known as orbital angular momentum or ‘m’ gives information about the spatial
l
subsidiary quantum number. It defines the orientation of the orbital with respect to
three-dimensional shape of the orbital. For a standard set of co-ordinate axis. For any
given value of n, l can have n values ranging sub-shell (defined by ‘l’ value) 2l+1 values of
from 0 to n – 1, that is, for a given value of n, m are possible and these values are given by :
l
the possible value of l are : l = 0, 1, 2, .......... m = – l, – (l–1), – (l–2)... 0,1... (l–2), (l–1), l
l
(n–1)
Thus for l = 0, the only permitted value
For example, when n = 1, value of l is only
of m = 0, [2(0)+1 = 1, one s orbital]. For l =
0. For n = 2, the possible value of l can be 0 l
1, m can be –1, 0 and +1 [2(1)+1 = 3, three p
and 1. For n = 3, the possible l values are 0, l
orbitals]. For l = 2, m = –2, –1, 0, +1 and +2,
1 and 2. l
[2(2)+1 = 5, five d orbitals]. It should be noted
Each shell consists of one or more that the values of m are derived from l and
l
sub-shells or sub-levels. The number of that the value of l are derived from n.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 55 9/9/2022 4:28:17 PM56 chemistry
Each orbital in an atom, therefore, is angular momentum of the electron — a vector
defined by a set of values for n, l and m. An quantity, can have two orientations relative to
l
orbital described by the quantum numbers the chosen axis. These two orientations are
n = 2, l = 1, m = 0 is an orbital in the p sub- distinguished by the spin quantum numbers
l
shell of the second shell. The following chart m which can take the values of +½ or –½.
s
gives the relation between the subshell and These are called the two spin states of the
the number of orbitals associated with it. electron and are normally represented by
Value of l 0 1 2 3 4 5 two arrows, ↑ (spin up) and ↓ (spin down). Two
electrons that have different m values (one +½
Subshell notation s p d f g h s
and the other –½) are said to have opposite
number of orbitals 1 3 5 7 9 11
spins. An orbital cannot hold more than two
Electron spin ‘s’ : The three quantum electrons and these two electrons should have
numbers labelling an atomic orbital can be opposite spins.
used equally well to define its energy, shape
To sum up, the four quantum numbers
and orientation. But all these quantum
provide the following information :
numbers are not enough to explain the line
i) n defines the shell, determines the size
spectra observed in the case of multi-electron
of the orbital and also to a large extent
atoms, that is, some of the lines actually occur
the energy of the orbital.
in doublets (two lines closely spaced), triplets
ii) There are n subshells in the nth shell. l
(three lines, closely spaced) etc. This suggests
identifies the subshell and determines
the presence of a few more energy levels than
the shape of the orbital (see section
predicted by the three quantum numbers.
2.6.2). There are (2l+1) orbitals of each
In 1925, George Uhlenbeck and Samuel type in a subshell, that is, one s orbital
Goudsmit proposed the presence of the fourth (l = 0), three p orbitals (l = 1) and five
quantum number known as the electron d orbitals (l = 2) per subshell. To some
spin quantum number (m ). An electron extent l also determines the energy of
s
spins around its own axis, much in a similar the orbital in a multi-electron atom.
way as earth spins around its own axis while
iii) m designates the orientation of the
revolving around the sun. In other words, l
orbital. For a given value of l, m has
l
an electron has, besides charge and mass,
(2l+1) values, the same as the number
intrinsic spin angular quantum number. Spin of orbitals per subshell. It means that
orbit, orbital and its importance
Orbit and orbital are not synonymous. An orbit, as proposed by Bohr, is a circular path around the
nucleus in which an electron moves. A precise description of this path of the electron is impossible
according to Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Bohr orbits, therefore, have no real meaning and
their existence can never be demonstrated experimentally. An atomic orbital, on the other hand,
is a quantum mechanical concept and refers to the one electron wave function ψ in an atom. It is
characterized by three quantum numbers (n, l and m) and its value depends upon the coordinates
l
of the electron. ψ has, by itself, no physical meaning. It is the square of the wave function i.e., |ψ|2
which has a physical meaning. |ψ|2 at any point in an atom gives the value of probability density
at that point. Probability density (|ψ|2) is the probability per unit volume and the product of |ψ|2
and a small volume (called a volume element) yields the probability of finding the electron in that
volume (the reason for specifying a small volume element is that |ψ|2 varies from one region to
another in space but its value can be assumed to be constant within a small volume element).
The total probability of finding the electron in a given volume can then be calculated by the sum
of all the products of |ψ|2 and the corresponding volume elements. It is thus possible to get the
probable distribution of an electron in an orbital.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 56 9/9/2022 4:28:17 PMstructure of atom 57
the number of orbitals is equal to the
number of ways in which they are
oriented.
iv) m refers to orientation of the spin of the
s
electron.
Problem 2.17
What is the total number of orbitals
associated with the principal quantum
number n = 3 ?
solution
For n = 3, the possible values of l are
0, 1 and 2. Thus there is one 3s orbital
(n = 3, l = 0 and m = 0); there are three
l
3p orbitals (n = 3, l = 1 and m = –1, 0,
l
+1); there are five 3d orbitals (n = 3, l =
2 and m = –2, –1, 0, +1+, +2). Fig. 2.12 The plots of (a) the orbital wave
l
Therefore, the total number of orbitals function ψ(r); (b) the variation of
is 1+3+5 = 9 probability density ψ2(r) as a function
of distance r of the electron from the
The same value can also be obtained by
nucleus for 1s and 2s orbitals.
using the relation; number of orbitals
= n2, i.e. 32 = 9.
According to the German physicist,
Max Born, the square of the wave function
Problem 2.18
(i.e.,ψ 2) at a point gives the probability density
Using s, p, d, f notations, describe the
of the electron at that point. The variation
orbital with the following quantum
of ψ 2 as a function of r for 1s and 2s orbitals
numbers
is given in Fig. 2.12(b). Here again, you may
(a) n = 2, l = 1, (b) n = 4, l = 0, (c) n = 5,
note that the curves for 1s and 2s orbitals
l = 3, (d) n = 3, l = 2
are different.
solution
It may be noted that for 1s orbital the
n l orbital probability density is maximum at the
nucleus and it decreases sharply as we move
a) 2 1 2p
away from it. On the other hand, for 2s
b) 4 0 4s
orbital the probability density first decreases
c) 5 3 5f
sharply to zero and again starts increasing.
d) 3 2 3d After reaching a small maxima it decreases
again and approaches zero as the value of
r increases further. The region where this
2.6.2 shapes of atomic orbitals probability density function reduces to zero
The orbital wave function or ψ for an electron is called nodal surfaces or simply nodes.
in an atom has no physical meaning. It In general, it has been found that ns-orbital
is simply a mathematical function of the has (n – 1) nodes, that is, number of nodes
coordinates of the electron. However, for increases with increase of principal quantum
different orbitals the plots of corresponding number n. In other words, number of nodes
wave functions as a function of r (the distance for 2s orbital is one, two for 3s and so on.
from the nucleus) are different. Fig. 2.12(a), These probability density variation can be
gives such plots for 1s (n = 1, l = 0) and 2s visualised in terms of charge cloud diagrams
(n = 2, l = 0) orbitals. [Fig. 2.13(a)]. In these diagrams, the density
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 57 9/9/2022 4:28:17 PM58 chemistry
of the dots in a region represents electron
probability density in that region.
boundary surface diagrams of constant
probability density for different orbitals give
a fairly good representation of the shapes
of the orbitals. In this representation, a
boundary surface or contour surface is
drawn in space for an orbital on which the
value of probability density |ψ|2 is constant.
In principle many such boundary surfaces
may be possible. However, for a given
orbital, only that boundary surface diagram
of constant probability density* is taken to
be good representation of the shape of the
orbital which encloses a region or volume in
Fig. 2.13 (a) Probability density plots of 1s and
which the probability of finding the electron
2s atomic orbitals. The density of the
is very high, say, 90%. The boundary surface dots represents the probability density
diagram for 1s and 2s orbitals are given in of finding the electron in that region.
Fig. 2.13(b). One may ask a question : Why (b) Boundary surface diagram for 1s
do we not draw a boundary surface diagram, and 2s orbitals.
which bounds a region in which the probability
of finding the electron is, 100 %? The answer
to this question is that the probability density
|ψ|2 has always some value, howsoever
small it may be, at any finite distance from
the nucleus. It is therefore, not possible to
draw a boundary surface diagram of a rigid
size in which the probability of finding the
electron is 100%. Boundary surface diagram
for a s orbital is actually a sphere centred on
the nucleus. In two dimensions, this sphere
looks like a circle. It encloses a region in
which probability of finding the electron is
about 90%.
Thus, we see that 1s and 2s orbitals are
spherical in shape. In reality all the s-orbitals
are spherically symmetric, that is, the
probability of finding the electron at a given
Fig. 2.14 Boundary surface diagrams of the
distance is equal in all the directions. It is also
three 2p orbitals.
observed that the size of the s orbital increases
with increase in n, that is, 4s > 3s > 2s > 1s
these diagrams, the nucleus is at the origin.
and the electron is located further away from Here, unlike s-orbitals, the boundary surface
the nucleus as the principal quantum number
diagrams are not spherical. Instead each
increases. p orbital consists of two sections called lobes
Boundary surface diagrams for three that are on either side of the plane that passes
2p orbitals (l = 1) are shown in Fig. 2.14. In through the nucleus. The probability density
* If probability density
|ψ|2
is constant on a given surface,
|ψ|
is also constant over the surface. The boundary surface
for
|ψ|2
and
|ψ|
are identical.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 58 9/9/2022 4:28:19 PMstructure of atom 59
function is zero on the plane where the two it is sufficient to remember that, because
lobes touch each other. The size, shape and there are three possible values of m, there
l
energy of the three orbitals are identical. are, therefore, three p orbitals whose axes
They differ however, in the way the lobes are are mutually perpendicular. Like s orbitals,
oriented. Since the lobes may be considered to p orbitals increase in size and energy with
lie along the x, y or z axis, they are given the increase in the principal quantum number
designations 2p , 2p , and 2p . It should be and hence the order of the energy and size of
x y z
understood, however, that there is no simple various p orbitals is 4p > 3p > 2p. Further, like
relation between the values of m (–1, 0 and +1) s orbitals, the probability density functions for
l
and the x, y and z directions. For our purpose, p-orbital also pass through value zero, besides
at zero and infinite distance, as the distance
from the nucleus increases. The number of
nodes are given by the n –2, that is number
of radial node is 1 for 3p orbital, two for 4p
orbital and so on.
For l = 2, the orbital is known as d-orbital
and the minimum value of principal quantum
number (n) has to be 3. as the value of l cannot
be greater than n–1. There are five m values
l
(–2, –1, 0, +1 and +2) for l = 2 and thus there
are five d orbitals. The boundary surface
diagram of d orbitals are shown in Fig. 2.15.
The five d-orbitals are designated as d ,
xy
d , d , d and d . The shapes of the first
yz xz x2–y2 z2
four d-orbitals are similar to each other, where
as that of the fifth one, d , is different from
z2
others, but all five 3d orbitals are equivalent
in energy. The d orbitals for which n is greater
than 3 (4d, 5d...) also have shapes similar to
3d orbital, but differ in energy and size.
Besides the radial nodes (i.e., probability
density function is zero), the probability
density functions for the np and nd orbitals
are zero at the plane (s), passing through the
nucleus (origin). For example, in case of p
z
orbital, xy-plane is a nodal plane, in case of
d orbital, there are two nodal planes passing
xy
through the origin and bisecting the xy plane
containing z-axis. These are called angular
nodes and number of angular nodes are given
by ‘l’, i.e., one angular node for p orbitals, two
angular nodes for ‘d’ orbitals and so on. the
total number of nodes are given by (n–1),
i.e., sum of l angular nodes and (n – l – 1)
radial nodes.
2.6.3 energies of orbitals
Fig. 2.15 Boundary surface diagrams of the five The energy of an electron in a hydrogen atom
3d orbitals. is determined solely by the principal quantum
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 59 9/9/2022 4:28:20 PM60 chemistry
number. Thus the energy of the orbitals in The energy of an electron in a multi-
hydrogen atom increases as follows : electron atom, unlike that of the hydrogen
atom, depends not only on its principal
1s < 2s = 2p < 3s = 3p = 3d <4s = 4p = 4d
quantum number (shell), but also on its
= 4f < (2.23)
azimuthal quantum number (subshell). That
and is depicted in Fig. 2.16. Although the
is, for a given principal quantum number, s,
shapes of 2s and 2p orbitals are different,
p, d, f ... all have different energies. Within
an electron has the same energy when it is
a given principal quantum number, the
in the 2s orbital as when it is present in 2p
energy of orbitals increases in the order
orbital. The orbitals having the same energy
s<p<d<f. For higher energy levels, these
are called degenerate. The 1s orbital in a
differences are sufficiently pronounced and
hydrogen atom, as said earlier, corresponds
straggering of orbital energy may result,
to the most stable condition and is called the
e.g., 4s<3d and 6s<5d; 4f<6p. The main
ground state and an electron residing in this
reason for having different energies of the
orbital is most strongly held by the nucleus.
subshells is the mutual repulsion among the
An electron in the 2s, 2p or higher orbitals in
electrons in multi-electron atoms. The only
a hydrogen atom is in excited state.
electrical interaction present in hydrogen
atom is the attraction between the negatively
charged electron and the positively charged
nucleus. In multi-electron atoms, besides the
presence of attraction between the electron
and nucleus, there are repulsion terms
between every electron and other electrons
present in the atom. Thus the stability of an
electron in a multi-electron atom is because
total attractive interactions are more than
the repulsive interactions. In general, the
repulsive interaction of the electrons in the
outer shell with the electrons in the inner shell
are more important. On the other hand, the
attractive interactions of an electron increases
with increase of positive charge (Ze) on the
nucleus. Due to the presence of electrons in
the inner shells, the electron in the outer shell
will not experience the full positive charge of
the nucleus (Ze). The effect will be lowered
due to the partial screening of positive charge
on the nucleus by the inner shell electrons.
This is known as the shielding of the outer
Fig. 2.16 Energy level diagrams for the few shell electrons from the nucleus by the
electronic shells of (a) hydrogen atom
inner shell electrons, and the net positive
and (b) multi-electronic atoms. Note that
charge experienced by the outer electrons is
orbitals for the same value of principal
known as effective nuclear charge (Z e).
quantum number, have the same eff
Despite the shielding of the outer electrons
energies even for different azimuthal
quantum number for hydrogen atom. from the nucleus by the inner shell electrons,
In case of multi-electron atoms, orbitals the attractive force experienced by the outer
with same principal quantum number shell electrons increases with increase of
possess different energies for different nuclear charge. In other words, the energy of
azimuthal quantum numbers.
interaction between, the nucleus and electron
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 60 9/9/2022 4:28:20 PMstructure of atom 61
(that is orbital energy) decreases (that is table 2.5 arrangement of orbitals with
more negative) with the increase of atomic increasing energy on the basis
number (Z). of (n+l) rule
Both the attractive and repulsive
interactions depend upon the shell and shape
of the orbital in which the electron is present.
For example electrons present in spherical
shaped, s orbital shields the outer electrons
from the nucleus more effectively as compared
to electrons present in p orbital. Similarly
electrons present in p orbitals shield the outer
electrons from the nucleus more than the
electrons present in d orbitals, even though all
these orbitals are present in the same shell.
Further within a shell, due to spherical shape
of s orbital, the s orbital electron spends more
time close to the nucleus in comparison to p
orbital electron which spends more time in
the vicinity of nucleus in comparison to d
orbital electron. In other words, for a given
shell (principal quantum number), the Z
eff
experienced by the electron decreases with
increase of azimuthal quantum number (l),
that is, the s orbital electron will be more
tightly bound to the nucleus than p orbital
electron which in turn will be better tightly
bound than the d orbital electron. The energy
of electrons in s orbital will be lower (more
negative) than that of p orbital electron
which will have less energy than that of d
orbital electron and so on. Since the extent same energy. Lastly it may be mentioned here
of shielding from the nucleus is different for that energies of the orbitals in the same
electrons in different orbitals, it leads to the subshell decrease with increase in the
splitting of energy levels within the same atomic number (Z ). For example, energy of
eff
shell (or same principal quantum number), 2s orbital of hydrogen atom is greater than
that is, energy of electron in an orbital, as that of 2s orbital of lithium and that of lithium
mentioned earlier, depends upon the values is greater than that of sodium and so on, that
of n and l. Mathematically, the dependence is, E (H) > E (Li) > E (Na) > E (K).
2s 2s 2s 2s
of energies of the orbitals on n and l are quite
2.6.4 filling of orbitals in atom
complicated but one simple rule is that, the
lower the value of (n + l) for an orbital, the The filling of electrons into the orbitals of
lower is its energy. if two orbitals have different atoms takes place according to
the same value of (n + l), the orbital with the aufbau principle which is based on the
lower value of n will have the lower energy. Pauli’s exclusion principle, the Hund’s rule
The Table 2.5 illustrates the (n + l ) rule and of maximum multiplicity and the relative
Fig. 2.16 depicts the energy levels of multi- energies of the orbitals.
electrons atoms. It may be noted that different
subshells of a particular shell have different Aufbau Principle
energies in case of multi-electrons atoms. The word ‘aufbau’ in German means ‘building
However, in hydrogen atom, these have the up’. The building up of orbitals means the
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 61 9/9/2022 4:28:20 PM62 chemistry
filling up of orbitals with electrons. The the top, the direction of the arrows gives the
principle states : in the ground state of the order of filling of orbitals, that is starting
atoms, the orbitals are filled in order of from right top to bottom left. With respect to
their increasing energies. In other words, placement of outermost valence electrons,
electrons first occupy the lowest energy orbital it is remarkably accurate for all atoms. For
available to them and enter into higher energy example, valence electron in potassium
orbitals only after the lower energy orbitals must choose between 3d and 4s orbitals and
are filled. As you have learnt above, energy as predicted by this sequence, it is found
of a given orbital depends upon effective in 4s orbital. The above order should be
nuclear charge and different type of orbitals assumed to be a rough guide to the filling
are affected to different extent. Thus, there of energy levels. In many cases, the orbitals
is no single ordering of energies of orbitals are similar in energy and small changes in
which will be universally correct for all atoms. atomic structure may bring about a change
in the order of filling. Even then, the above
However, following order of energies of
series is a useful guide to the building of the
the orbitals is extremely useful:
electronic structure of an atom provided that
1s, 2s, 2p, 3s, 3p, 4s, 3d, 4p, 5s, 4d, 5p, 4f,
it is remembered that exceptions may occur.
5d, 6p, 7s...
Pauli Exclusion Principle
The order may be remembered by using
the method given in Fig. 2.17. Starting from The number of electrons to be filled in various
orbitals is restricted by the exclusion principle,
given by the Austrian scientist Wolfgang Pauli
(1926). According to this principle : no two
electrons in an atom can have the same set
of four quantum numbers. Pauli exclusion
principle can also be stated as : “only two
electrons may exist in the same orbital and
these electrons must have opposite spin.”
This means that the two electrons can have
the same value of three quantum numbers
n, l and m, but must have the opposite spin
l
quantum number. The restriction imposed
by Pauli’s exclusion principle on the number
of electrons in an orbital helps in calculating
the capacity of electrons to be present in any
subshell. For example, subshell 1s comprises
one orbital and thus the maximum number of
electrons present in 1s subshell can be two, in
p and d subshells, the maximum number of
electrons can be 6 and 10 and so on. This can
be summed up as : the maximum number
of electrons in the shell with principal
quantum number n is equal to 2n2.
Hund’s Rule of Maximum Multiplicity
This rule deals with the filling of electrons into
the orbitals belonging to the same subshell
(that is, orbitals of equal energy, called
Fig.2.17 Order of filling of orbitals
degenerate orbitals). It states : pairing of
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 62 9/9/2022 4:28:20 PMstructure of atom 63
electrons in the orbitals belonging to the 1s orbital. Its configuration is, therefore, 1s2.
same subshell (p, d or f) does not take As mentioned above, the two electrons differ
place until each orbital belonging to that from each other with opposite spin, as can be
subshell has got one electron each i.e., it seen from the orbital diagram.
is singly occupied.
Since there are three p, five d and seven f
orbitals, therefore, the pairing of electrons will The third electron of lithium (Li) is not
start in the p, d and f orbitals with the entry allowed in the 1s orbital because of Pauli
of 4th, 6th and 8th electron, respectively. It exclusion principle. It, therefore, takes the
has been observed that half filled and fully next available choice, namely the 2s orbital.
filled degenerate set of orbitals acquire extra The electronic configuration of Li is 1s22s1.
stability due to their symmetry (see Section, The 2s orbital can accommodate one more
2.6.7). electron. The configuration of beryllium (Be)
atom is, therefore, 1s2 2s2 (see Table 2.6,
2.6.5 Electronic Configuration of Atoms
page 66 for the electronic configurations of
The distribution of electrons into orbitals of an
elements).
atom is called its electronic configuration.
In the next six elements—boron
If one keeps in mind the basic rules which
(B, 1s22s22p1), carbon (C, 1s22s22p2), nitrogen
govern the filling of different atomic orbitals,
the electronic configurations of different (N, 1s22s22p3), oxygen (O, 1s22s22p4), fluorine
atoms can be written very easily. (F, 1s22s22p5) and neon (Ne, 1s22s22p6), the 2p
orbitals get progressively filled. This process
The electronic configuration of different
is completed with the neon atom. The orbital
atoms can be represented in two ways. For
picture of these elements can be represented
example :
as follows :
(i) sapbdc ...... notation
(ii) Orbital diagram
s p d
In the first notation, the subshell is
represented by the respective letter symbol
and the number of electrons present in the
subshell is depicted, as the super script, like
a, b, c, ... etc. The similar subshell represented
for different shells is differentiated by writing
the principal quantum number before the
respective subshell. In the second notation
each orbital of the subshell is represented
by a box and the electron is represented by
an arrow (↑) a positive spin or an arrow (↓) The electronic configuration of the
a negative spin. The advantage of second elements sodium (Na,1s22s22p63s1) to argon
notation over the first is that it represents all (Ar,1s22s22p63s23p6), follow exactly the same
the four quantum numbers. pattern as the elements from lithium to neon
with the difference that the 3s and 3p orbitals
The hydrogen atom has only one electron
are getting filled now. This process can be
which goes in the orbital with the lowest energy,
namely 1s. The electronic configuration of the simplified if we represent the total number
hydrogen atom is 1s1 meaning that it has of electrons in the first two shells by the
one electron in the 1s orbital. The second name of element neon (Ne). The electronic
electron in helium (He) can also occupy the configuration of the elements from sodium to
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 63 9/9/2022 4:28:21 PM64 chemistry
argon can be written as (Na, [Ne]3s1) to (Ar, After this, filling of 6p, then 7s and finally 5f
[Ne] 3s23p6). The electrons in the completely and 6d orbitals takes place. The elements
filled shells are known as core electrons and after uranium (U) are all short-lived and all of
the electrons that are added to the electronic them are produced artificially. The electronic
shell with the highest principal quantum configurations of the known elements (as
number are called valence electrons. For determined by spectroscopic methods) are
example, the electrons in Ne are the core tabulated in Table 2.6 (page 66).
electrons and the electrons from Na to Ar are
One may ask what is the utility of knowing
the valence electrons. In potassium (K) and
the electron configuration? The modern
calcium (Ca), the 4s orbital, being lower in
approach to the chemistry, infact, depends
energy than the 3d orbitals, is occupied by
almost entirely on electronic distribution to
one and two electrons respectively.
understand and explain chemical behaviour.
A new pattern is followed beginning with For example, questions like why two or more
scandium (Sc). The 3d orbital, being lower atoms combine to form molecules, why some
in energy than the 4p orbital, is filled first.
elements are metals while others are non-
Consequently, in the next ten elements,
metals, why elements like helium and argon
scandium (Sc), titanium (Ti), vanadium (V),
are not reactive but elements like the halogens
chromium (Cr), manganese (Mn), iron (Fe),
are reactive, find simple explanation from the
cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), copper (Cu) and zinc
electronic configuration. These questions have
(Zn), the five 3d orbitals are progressively
no answer in the Daltonian model of atom.
occupied. We may be puzzled by the fact
A detailed understanding of the electronic
that chromium and copper have five and ten
structure of atom is, therefore, very essential
electrons in 3d orbitals rather than four and
for getting an insight into the various aspects
nine as their position would have indicated
of modern chemical knowledge.
with two-electrons in the 4s orbital. The
reason is that fully filled orbitals and half- 2.6.6 stability of completely filled and
filled orbitals have extra stability (that is, Half filled subshells
lower energy). Thus p3, p6, d5, d10,f 7, f14 etc. The ground state electronic configuration of
configurations, which are either half-filled the atom of an element always corresponds to
or fully filled, are more stable. Chromium the state of the lowest total electronic energy.
and copper therefore adopt the d5 and
The electronic configurations of most of the
d10 configuration (Section 2.6.7)[caution:
atoms follow the basic rules given in Section
exceptions do exist]
2.6.5. However, in certain elements such as
With the saturation of the 3d orbitals, Cu, or Cr, where the two subshells (4s and
the filling of the 4p orbital starts at gallium 3d) differ slightly in their energies, an electron
(Ga) and is complete at krypton (Kr). In the shifts from a subshell of lower energy (4s) to a
next eighteen elements from rubidium (Rb) subshell of higher energy (3d), provided such
to xenon (Xe), the pattern of filling the 5s, a shift results in all orbitals of the subshell
4d and 5p orbitals are similar to that of 4s, of higher energy getting either completely
3d and 4p orbitals as discussed above. Then filled or half filled. The valence electronic
comes the turn of the 6s orbital. In caesium configurations of Cr and Cu, therefore, are
(Cs) and the barium (Ba), this orbital contains 3d5 4s1 and 3d10 4s1 respectively and not 3d4
one and two electrons, respectively. Then from 4s2 and 3d9 4s2. It has been found that there is
lanthanum (La) to mercury (Hg), the filling up extra stability associated with these electronic
of electrons takes place in 4f and 5d orbitals. configurations.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 64 9/9/2022 4:28:21 PMstructure of atom 65
Causes of Stability of Completely Filled and Half-filled Subshells
The completely filled and completely
half-filled subshells are stable due to the
following reasons:
1.Symmetrical distribution of
electrons: It is well known that symmetry
leads to stability. The completely filled
or half filled subshells have symmetrical
distribution of electrons in them and
are therefore more stable. Electrons in
the same subshell (here 3d) have equal
energy but different spatial distribution.
Consequently, their shielding of one-
another is relatively small and the
electrons are more strongly attracted by
the nucleus.
2. Exchange Energy : The stabilizing
effect arises whenever two or more
electrons with the same spin are present
in the degenerate orbitals of a subshell.
These electrons tend to exchange their
positions and the energy released due to
this exchange is called exchange energy.
The number of exchanges that can take
place is maximum when the subshell
is either half filled or completely filled
(Fig. 2.18). As a result the exchange
energy is maximum and so is the stability.
You may note that the exchange
energy is at the basis of Hund’s rule
that electrons which enter orbitals of
equal energy have parallel spins as far
as possible. In other words, the extra
stability of half-filled and completely filled
subshell is due to: (i) relatively small
shielding, (ii) smaller coulombic repulsion
energy, and (iii) larger exchange energy.
Details about the exchange energy will be Fig. 2.18 Possible exchange for a d5
configuration
dealt with in higher classes.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 65 9/9/2022 4:28:21 PM66 chemistry
Table 2.6 Electronic Configurations of the Elements
* Elements with exceptional electronic configurations
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 66 9/9/2022 4:28:22 PMstructure of atom 67
** Elements with atomic number 112 and above have been reported but not yet fully authenticated and named.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 67 9/9/2022 4:28:23 PM68 chemistry
sUmmary
atoms are the building blocks of elements. They are the smallest parts of an element that
chemically react. The first atomic theory, proposed by John Dalton in 1808, regarded atom as
the ultimate indivisible particle of matter. Towards the end of the nineteenth century, it was
proved experimentally that atoms are divisible and consist of three fundamental particles:
electrons, protons and neutrons. The discovery of sub-atomic particles led to the proposal
of various atomic models to explain the structure of atom.
Thomson in 1898 proposed that an atom consists of uniform sphere of positive electricity
with electrons embedded into it. This model in which mass of the atom is considered to
be evenly spread over the atom was proved wrong by Rutherford’s famous alpha-particle
scattering experiment in 1909. Rutherford concluded that atom is made of a tiny positively
charged nucleus, at its centre with electrons revolving around it in circular orbits.
rutherford model, which resembles the solar system, was no doubt an improvement over
thomson model but it could not account for the stability of the atom i.e., why the electron
does not fall into the nucleus. Further, it was also silent about the electronic structure of
atoms i.e., about the distribution and relative energies of electrons around the nucleus. The
difficulties of the Rutherford model were overcome by Niels Bohr in 1913 in his model of the
hydrogen atom. Bohr postulated that electron moves around the nucleus in circular orbits.
Only certain orbits can exist and each orbit corresponds to a specific energy. Bohr calculated
the energy of electron in various orbits and for each orbit predicted the distance between the
electron and nucleus. bohr model, though offering a satisfactory model for explaining the
spectra of the hydrogen atom, could not explain the spectra of multi-electron atoms. The
reason for this was soon discovered. In Bohr model, an electron is regarded as a charged
particle moving in a well defined circular orbit about the nucleus. The wave character of
the electron is ignored in Bohr’s theory. An orbit is a clearly defined path and this path can
completely be defined only if both the exact position and the exact velocity of the electron
at the same time are known. This is not possible according to the Heisenberg uncertainty
principle. Bohr model of the hydrogen atom, therefore, not only ignores the dual behaviour
of electron but also contradicts Heisenberg uncertainty principle.
Erwin Schrödinger, in 1926, proposed an equation called Schrödinger equation to
describe the electron distributions in space and the allowed energy levels in atoms. This
equation incorporates de Broglie’s concept of wave-particle duality and is consistent with
Heisenberg uncertainty principle. When Schrödinger equation is solved for the electron in a
hydrogen atom, the solution gives the possible energy states the electron can occupy [and
the corresponding wave function(s) (ψ) (which in fact are the mathematical functions) of the
electron associated with each energy state]. These quantized energy states and corresponding
wave functions which are characterized by a set of three quantum numbers (principal
quantum number n, azimuthal quantum number l and magnetic quantum number m)
l
arise as a natural consequence in the solution of the Schrödinger equation. The restrictions
on the values of these three quantum numbers also come naturally from this solution. The
quantum mechanical model of the hydrogen atom successfully predicts all aspects of the
hydrogen atom spectrum including some phenomena that could not be explained by the
Bohr model.
According to the quantum mechanical model of the atom, the electron distribution of an
atom containing a number of electrons is divided into shells. The shells, in turn, are thought
to consist of one or more subshells and subshells are assumed to be composed of one or
more orbitals, which the electrons occupy. While for hydrogen and hydrogen like systems
(such as He+, Li2+ etc.) all the orbitals within a given shell have same energy, the energy of
the orbitals in a multi-electron atom depends upon the values of n and l: The lower the value
of (n + l ) for an orbital, the lower is its energy. If two orbitals have the same (n + l ) value,
the orbital with lower value of n has the lower energy. In an atom many such orbitals are
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 68 9/9/2022 4:28:23 PMstructure of atom 69
possible and electrons are filled in those orbitals in order of increasing energy in accordance
with Pauli exclusion principle (no two electrons in an atom can have the same set of four
quantum numbers) and Hund’s rule of maximum multiplicity (pairing of electrons in the
orbitals belonging to the same subshell does not take place until each orbital belonging to
that subshell has got one electron each, i.e., is singly occupied). This forms the basis of the
electronic structure of atoms.
eXercises
2.1 (i) Calculate the number of electrons which will together weigh one gram.
(ii) Calculate the mass and charge of one mole of electrons.
2.2 (i) Calculate the total number of electrons present in one mole of methane.
(ii) Find (a) the total number and (b) the total mass of neutrons in 7 mg of 14C.
(Assume that mass of a neutron = 1.675 × 10–27 kg).
(iii) Find (a) the total number and (b) the total mass of protons in 34 mg of NH
3
at STP.
Will the answer change if the temperature and pressure are changed ?
2.3 How many neutrons and protons are there in the following nuclei ?
13C, 16O, 24Mg, 56Fe, 88Sr
6 8 12 26 38
2.4 Write the complete symbol for the atom with the given atomic number (Z) and atomic
mass (A)
(i) Z = 17, A = 35.
(ii) Z = 92, A = 233.
(iii) Z = 4, A = 9.
2.5 Yellow light emitted from a sodium lamp has a wavelength (λ) of 580 nm. Calculate
the frequency (ν) and wavenumber ( ) of the yellow light.
2.6 Find energy of each of the photons which
(i) correspond to light of frequency 3×1015 Hz.
(ii) have wavelength of 0.50 Å.
2.7 Calculate the wavelength, frequency and wavenumber of a light wave whose period
is 2.0 × 10–10 s.
2.8 What is the number of photons of light with a wavelength of 4000 pm that provide
1J of energy?
2.9 A photon of wavelength 4 × 10–7 m strikes on metal surface, the work function
of the metal being 2.13 eV. Calculate (i) the energy of the photon (eV),
(ii) the kinetic energy of the emission, and (iii) the velocity of the photoelectron
(1 eV= 1.6020 × 10–19 J).
2.10 Electromagnetic radiation of wavelength 242 nm is just sufficient to ionise the
sodium atom. Calculate the ionisation energy of sodium in kJ mol–1.
2.11 A 25 watt bulb emits monochromatic yellow light of wavelength of 0.57µm.
Calculate the rate of emission of quanta per second.
2.12 Electrons are emitted with zero velocity from a metal surface when it is exposed to
radiation of wavelength 6800 Å. Calculate threshold frequency (ν ) and work function
0
(W ) of the metal.
0
2.13 What is the wavelength of light emitted when the electron in a hydrogen atom undergoes
transition from an energy level with n = 4 to an energy level with n = 2?
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 69 9/9/2022 4:28:24 PM70 chemistry
2.14 How much energy is required to ionise a H atom if the electron occupies n = 5 orbit?
Compare your answer with the ionization enthalpy of H atom (energy required to
remove the electron from n =1 orbit).
2.15 What is the maximum number of emission lines when the excited electron of a H
atom in n = 6 drops to the ground state?
2.16 (i) The energy associated with the first orbit in the hydrogen atom is
–2.18 × 10–18 J atom–1. What is the energy associated with the fifth orbit?
(ii) Calculate the radius of Bohr’s fifth orbit for hydrogen atom.
2.17 Calculate the wavenumber for the longest wavelength transition in the Balmer series
of atomic hydrogen.
2.18 What is the energy in joules, required to shift the electron of the hydrogen atom from
the first Bohr orbit to the fifth Bohr orbit and what is the wavelength of the light
emitted when the electron returns to the ground state? The ground state electron
energy is –2.18 × 10–11 ergs.
2.19 The electron energy in hydrogen atom is given by E = (–2.18 × 10–18 )/n2 J. Calculate
n
the energy required to remove an electron completely from the n = 2 orbit. What is
the longest wavelength of light in cm that can be used to cause this transition?
2.20 Calculate the wavelength of an electron moving with a velocity of 2.05 × 107 m s–1.
2.21 The mass of an electron is 9.1 × 10–31 kg. If its K.E. is 3.0 × 10–25 J, calculate its
wavelength.
2.22 Which of the following are isoelectronic species i.e., those having the same number
of electrons?
Na+, K+, Mg2+, Ca2+, S2–, Ar.
2.23 (i) Write the electronic configurations of the following ions: (a) H– (b) Na+ (c) O2–
(d) F–
(ii) What are the atomic numbers of elements whose outermost electrons are
represented by (a) 3s1 (b) 2p3 and (c) 3p5 ?
(iii) Which atoms are indicated by the following configurations ?
(a) [He] 2s1 (b) [Ne] 3s2 3p3 (c) [Ar] 4s2 3d1.
2.24 What is the lowest value of n that allows g orbitals to exist?
2.25 An electron is in one of the 3d orbitals. Give the possible values of n, l and m for
l
this electron.
2.26 An atom of an element contains 29 electrons and 35 neutrons. Deduce (i) the number
of protons and (ii) the electronic configuration of the element.
2.27 Give the number of electrons in the species
2.28 (i) An atomic orbital has n = 3. What are the possible values of l and ml ?
(ii) List the quantum numbers (ml and l) of electrons for 3d orbital.
(iii) Which of the following orbitals are possible?
1p, 2s, 2p and 3f
2.29 Using s, p, d notations, describe the orbital with the following quantum numbers.
(a) n=1, l=0; (b) n = 3; l=1 (c) n = 4; l =2; (d) n=4; l=3.
2.30 Explain, giving reasons, which of the following sets of quantum numbers are not
possible.
(a) n = 0, l = 0, m = 0, m = + ½
l s
(b) n = 1, l = 0, ml = 0, ms = – ½
(c) n = 1, l = 1, m = 0, m = + ½
l s
(d) n = 2, l = 1, m = 0, m = – ½
l s
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 70 9/9/2022 4:28:24 PMstructure of atom 71
(e) n = 3, l = 3, ml = –3, ms = + ½
(f) n = 3, l = 1, m = 0, m = + ½
l s
2.31 How many electrons in an atom may have the following quantum numbers?
(a) n = 4, m = – ½ (b) n = 3, l = 0
s
2.32 Show that the circumference of the Bohr orbit for the hydrogen atom is an integral
multiple of the de Broglie wavelength associated with the electron revolving around
the orbit.
2.33 What transition in the hydrogen spectrum would have the same wavelength as the
Balmer transition n = 4 to n = 2 of He+ spectrum ?
2.34 Calculate the energy required for the process
He+ (g)  He2+ (g) + e–
The ionization energy for the H atom in the ground state is 2.18 × 10–18 J atom–1
2.35 If the diameter of a carbon atom is 0.15 nm, calculate the number of carbon atoms
which can be placed side by side in a straight line across length of scale of length
20 cm long.
2.36 2 ×108 atoms of carbon are arranged side by side. Calculate the radius of carbon
atom if the length of this arrangement is 2.4 cm.
2.37 The diameter of zinc atom is 2.6 Å. Calculate (a) radius of zinc atom in pm and
(b) number of atoms present in a length of 1.6 cm if the zinc atoms are arranged
side by side lengthwise.
2.38 A certain particle carries 2.5 × 10–16C of static electric charge. Calculate the number
of electrons present in it.
2.39 In Milikan’s experiment, static electric charge on the oil drops has been obtained
by shining X-rays. If the static electric charge on the oil drop is –1.282 × 10–18C,
calculate the number of electrons present on it.
2.40 In Rutherford’s experiment, generally the thin foil of heavy atoms, like gold, platinum
etc. have been used to be bombarded by the α-particles. If the thin foil of light atoms
like aluminium etc. is used, what difference would be observed from the above
results ?
2.41 Symbols 79Brand 79Br can be written, whereas symbols 35Br and 35Br are not
35 79
acceptable. Answer briefly.
2.42 An element with mass number 81 contains 31.7% more neutrons as compared to
protons. Assign the atomic symbol.
2.43 An ion with mass number 37 possesses one unit of negative charge. If the ion
conatins 11.1% more neutrons than the electrons, find the symbol of the ion.
2.44 An ion with mass number 56 contains 3 units of positive charge and 30.4% more
neutrons than electrons. Assign the symbol to this ion.
2.45 Arrange the following type of radiations in increasing order of frequency: (a) radiation
from microwave oven (b) amber light from traffic signal (c) radiation from FM radio
(d) cosmic rays from outer space and (e) X-rays.
2.46 Nitrogen laser produces a radiation at a wavelength of 337.1 nm. If the number of
photons emitted is 5.6 × 1024, calculate the power of this laser.
2.47 Neon gas is generally used in the sign boards. If it emits strongly at 616 nm,
calculate (a) the frequency of emission, (b) distance traveled by this radiation in
30 s (c) energy of quantum and (d) number of quanta present if it produces 2 J of
energy.
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 71 9/9/2022 4:28:24 PM72 chemistry
2.48 In astronomical observations, signals observed from the distant stars are generally
weak. If the photon detector receives a total of 3.15 × 10–18 J from the radiations of
600 nm, calculate the number of photons received by the detector.
2.49 Lifetimes of the molecules in the excited states are often measured by using pulsed
radiation source of duration nearly in the nano second range. If the radiation source
has the duration of 2 ns and the number of photons emitted during the pulse source
is 2.5 × 1015, calculate the energy of the source.
2.50 The longest wavelength doublet absorption transition is observed at 589 and 589.6
nm. Calcualte the frequency of each transition and energy difference between two
excited states.
2.51 The work function for caesium atom is 1.9 eV. Calculate (a) the threshold wavelength
and (b) the threshold frequency of the radiation. If the caesium element is irradiated
with a wavelength 500 nm, calculate the kinetic energy and the velocity of the ejected
photoelectron.
2.52 Following results are observed when sodium metal is irradiated with different
wavelengths. Calculate (a) threshold wavelength and, (b) Planck’s constant.
λ (nm) 500 450 400
v × 10–5 (cm s–1) 2.55 4.35 5.35
2.53 The ejection of the photoelectron from the silver metal in the photoelectric effect
experiment can be stopped by applying the voltage of 0.35 V when the radiation
256.7 nm is used. Calculate the work function for silver metal.
2.54 If the photon of the wavelength 150 pm strikes an atom and one of tis inner bound
electrons is ejected out with a velocity of 1.5 × 107 m s–1, calculate the energy with
which it is bound to the nucleus.
2.55 Emission transitions in the Paschen series end at orbit n = 3 and start from orbit n
and can be represeted as v = 3.29 × 1015 (Hz) [1/32 – 1/n2]
Calculate the value of n if the transition is observed at 1285 nm. Find the region of
the spectrum.
2.56 Calculate the wavelength for the emission transition if it starts from the orbit having
radius 1.3225 nm and ends at 211.6 pm. Name the series to which this transition
belongs and the region of the spectrum.
2.57 Dual behaviour of matter proposed by de Broglie led to the discovery of electron
microscope often used for the highly magnified images of biological molecules and
other type of material. If the velocity of the electron in this microscope is 1.6 × 106
ms–1, calculate de Broglie wavelength associated with this electron.
2.58 Similar to electron diffraction, neutron diffraction microscope is also used for the
determination of the structure of molecules. If the wavelength used here is 800 pm,
calculate the characteristic velocity associated with the neutron.
2.59 If the velocity of the electron in Bohr’s first orbit is 2.19 × 106 ms–1, calculate the
de Broglie wavelength associated with it.
2.60 The velocity associated with a proton moving in a potential difference of 1000 V
is 4.37 × 105 ms–1. If the hockey ball of mass 0.1 kg is moving with this velocity,
calcualte the wavelength associated with this velocity.
2.61 If the position of the electron is measured within an accuracy of + 0.002 nm, calculate
the uncertainty in the momentum of the electron. Suppose the momentum of the
electron is h/4π × 0.05 nm, is there any problem in defining this value.
m
2.62 The quantum numbers of six electrons are given below. Arrange them in order of
increasing energies. If any of these combination(s) has/have the same energy lists:
1. n = 4, l = 2, m = –2 , m = –1/2
l s
2. n = 3, l = 2, m = 1 , m = +1/2
l s
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 72 9/9/2022 4:28:24 PMstructure of atom 73
3. n = 4, l = 1, m = 0 , m = +1/2
l s
4. n = 3, l = 2, m = –2 , m = –1/2
l s
5. n = 3, l = 1, m = –1 , m = +1/2
l s
6. n = 4, l = 1, m = 0 , m = +1/2
l s
2.63 The bromine atom possesses 35 electrons. It contains 6 electrons in 2p orbital,
6 electrons in 3p orbital and 5 electron in 4p orbital. Which of these electron
experiences the lowest effective nuclear charge ?
2.64 Among the following pairs of orbitals which orbital will experience the larger effective
nuclear charge? (i) 2s and 3s, (ii) 4d and 4f, (iii) 3d and 3p.
2.65 The unpaired electrons in Al and Si are present in 3p orbital. Which electrons will
experience more effective nuclear charge from the nucleus ?
2.66 Indicate the number of unpaired electrons in : (a) P, (b) Si, (c) Cr, (d) Fe and (e) Kr.
2.67 (a) How many subshells are associated with n = 4 ? (b) How many electrons will be
present in the subshells having m value of –1/2 for n = 4 ?
s
2024-25
Unit 2.indd 73 9/9/2022 4:28:24 PM