99
UUUUUnnnnniiiiittttt
AAAAAAAAAAmmmmmmmmmmiiiiiiiiiinnnnnnnnnneeeeeeeeeessssssssss
Objectives
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
“The chief commercial use of amines is as intermediates in the
• describe amines as derivatives of
synthesis of medicines and fibres” .
ammonia having a pyramidal
structure;
Amines constitute an important class of organic
• classify amines as primary,
compounds derived by replacing one or more hydrogen
secondary and tertiary;
atoms of ammonia molecule by alkyl/aryl group(s). In
• name amines by common names
nature, they occur among proteins, vitamins, alkaloids
and IUPAC system;
and hormones. Synthetic examples include polymers,
• describe some of the important
dye stuffs and drugs. Two biologically active
methods of preparation of amines;
compounds, namely adrenaline and ephedrine, both
• explain the properties of amines;
containing secondary amino group, are used to increase
• distinguish between primary,
blood pressure. Novocain, a synthetic amino compound,
secondary and tertiary amines;
is used as an anaesthetic in dentistry. Benadryl, a well
• describe the method of prepara-
known antihistaminic drug also contains tertiary amino
tion of diazonium salts and their
group. Quaternary ammonium salts are used as
importance in the synthesis of a
series of aromatic compounds surfactants. Diazonium salts are intermediates in the
including azo dyes. preparation of a variety of aromatic compounds
including dyes. In this Unit, you will learn about amines
and diazonium salts.
I. AMINES
Amines can be considered as derivatives of ammonia,
obtained by replacement of one, two or all the three
hydrogen atoms by alkyl and/or aryl groups.
For example:
99999.....11111 SSSSStttttrrrrruuuuuccccctttttuuuuurrrrreeeee ooooofffff AAAAAmmmmmiiiiinnnnneeeeesssss Like ammonia, nitrogen atom of amines is trivalent and
carries an unshared pair of electrons. Nitrogen orbitals
in amines are therefore, sp3 hybridised and the geometry
of amines is pyramidal. Each of the three sp3 hybridised
orbitals of nitrogen overlap with orbitals of hydrogen or
carbon depending upon the composition of the amines.
The fourth orbital of nitrogen in all amines contains an
unshared pair of electrons. Due to the presence of
unshared pair of electrons, the angle C–N–E, (where E is
Rationalised 2023-24C or H) is less than 109.5°; for instance, it is 108o in case of
trimethylamine as shown in Fig. 9.1.
Fig. 9.1 Pyramidal shape of trimethylamine
99999.....22222 CCCCClllllaaaaassssssssssiiiiifffffiiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Amines are classified as primary (1o), secondary (2o) and tertiary (3o)
depending upon the number of hydrogen atoms replaced by alkyl or
aryl groups in ammonia molecule. If one hydrogen atom of ammonia
is replaced by R or Ar , we get RNH or ArNH , a primary amine (1o).
2 2
If two hydrogen atoms of ammonia or one hydrogen atom of R-NH are
2
replaced by another alkyl/aryl(R’) group, what would you get? You
get R-NHR’, secondary amine. The second alkyl/aryl group may be
same or different. Replacement of another hydrogen atom by alkyl/aryl
group leads to the formation of tertiary amine. Amines are said to be
‘simple’ when all the alkyl or aryl groups are the same, and ‘mixed’
when they are different.
99999.....33333 NNNNNooooommmmmeeeeennnnnccccclllllaaaaatttttuuuuurrrrreeeee In common system, an aliphatic amine is named by prefixing alkyl
group to amine, i.e., alkylamine as one word (e.g., methylamine). In
secondary and tertiary amines, when two or more groups are the same,
the prefix di or tri is appended before the name of alkyl group. In
IUPAC system, primary amines are named as alkanamines. The name
is derived by replacement of ‘e’ of alkane by the word amine. For
example, CH NH is named as methanamine. In case, more than one
3 2
amino group is present at different positions in the parent chain, their
positions are specified by giving numbers to the carbon atoms bearing
–NH groups and suitable prefix such as di, tri, etc. is attached to the
2
amine. The letter ‘e’ of the suffix of the hydrocarbon part is retained. For
example, H N–CH –CH –NH is named as ethane-1, 2-diamine.
2 2 2 2
To name secondary and tertiary amines, we use locant N to designate
substituent attached to a nitrogen atom. For example, CH NHCH CH is
3 2 3
Chemistry 260
Rationalised 2023-24named as N-methylethanamine and (CH CH ) N is named as N, N-
3 2 3
diethylethanamine. More examples are given in Table 9.1.
In arylamines, –NH group is directly attached to the benzene ring.
2
C H NH is the simplest example of arylamine. In common system, it
6 5 2
is known as aniline. It is also an accepted IUPAC name. While naming
arylamines according to IUPAC system, suffix ‘e’ of arene is replaced by
‘amine’. Thus in IUPAC system, C H –NH is named as benzenamine.
6 5 2
Common and IUPAC names of some alkylamines and arylamines are
given in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1: Nomenclature of Some Alkylamines and Arylamines
Amine Common name IUPAC name
CH –CH –NH Ethylamine Ethanamine
3- 2 2
CH –CH –CH –NH n-Propylamine Propan-1-amine
3 2 2 2
Isopropylamine Propan-2-amine
Ethylmethylamine N-Methylethanamine
Trimethylamine N,N-Dimethylmethanamine
N,N-Diethylbutylamine N,N-Diethylbutan-1-amine
Allylamine Prop-2-en-1-amine
Hexamethylenediamine Hexane-1,6-diamine
Aniline Aniline or Benzenamine
o-Toluidine 2-Methylaniline
p-Bromoaniline 4-Bromobenzenamine
or
4-Bromoaniline
N,N-Dimethylaniline N,N-Dimethylbenzenamine
261 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
9.1 Classify the following amines as primary, secondary or tertiary:
9.2 (i) Write structures of different isomeric amines corresponding to the molecular
formula, C H N.
4 11
(ii) Write IUPAC names of all the isomers.
(iii) What type of isomerism is exhibited by different pairs of amines?
99999.....44444 PPPPPrrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Amines are prepared by the following methods:
ooooofffff AAAAAmmmmmiiiiinnnnneeeeesssss
1. Reduction of nitro compounds
Nitro compounds are reduced to amines by passing hydrogen gas
in the presence of finely divided nickel, palladium or platinum and
also by reduction with metals in acidic medium. Nitroalkanes can
also be similarly reduced to the corresponding alkanamines.
Reduction with iron scrap and hydrochloric acid is preferred because
FeCl formed gets hydrolysed to release hydrochloric acid during the
2
reaction. Thus, only a small amount of hydrochloric acid is required
to initiate the reaction.
2. Ammonolysis of alkyl halides
You have read (Unit 6, Class XII) that the carbon - halogen bond in
alkyl or benzyl halides can be easily cleaved by a nucleophile. Hence,
an alkyl or benzyl halide on reaction with an ethanolic solution of
ammonia undergoes nucleophilic substitution reaction in which the
halogen atom is replaced by an amino (–NH ) group. This process of
2
cleavage of the C–X bond by ammonia molecule is known as
ammonolysis. The reaction is carried out in a sealed tube at 373
K. The primary amine thus obtained behaves as a nucleophile and
can further react with alkyl halide to form secondary and tertiary
amines, and finally quaternary ammonium salt.
Chemistry 262
Rationalised 2023-24The free amine can be obtained from the ammonium salt by treatment
with a strong base:
Ammonolysis has the disadvantage of yielding a mixture of primary,
secondary and tertiary amines and also a quaternary ammonium salt.
However, primary amine is obtained as a major product by taking
large excess of ammonia.
The order of reactivity of halides with amines is RI > RBr >RCl.
Write chemical equations for the following reactions: EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 99999.....11111
(i) Reaction of ethanolic NH with C H Cl.
3 2 5
(ii) Ammonolysis of benzyl chloride and reaction of amine so formed
with two moles of CH Cl.
3
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
3. Reduction of nitriles
Nitriles on reduction with lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH ) or
4
catalytic hydrogenation produce primary amines. This reaction is
used for ascent of amine series, i.e., for preparation of amines
containing one carbon atom more than the starting amine.
4. Reduction of amides
The amides on reduction with lithium aluminium hydride yield
amines.
263 Amines
Rationalised 2023-245. Gabriel phthalimide synthesis
Gabriel synthesis is used for the preparation of primary amines.
Phthalimide on treatment with ethanolic potassium hydroxide forms
potassium salt of phthalimide which on heating with alkyl halide
followed by alkaline hydrolysis produces the corresponding primary
amine. Aromatic primary amines cannot be prepared by this method
because aryl halides do not undergo nucleophilic substitution with
the anion formed by phthalimide.
6. Hoffmann bromamide degradation reaction
Hoffmann developed a method for preparation of primary amines by
treating an amide with bromine in an aqueous or ethanolic solution
of sodium hydroxide. In this degradation reaction, migration of an
alkyl or aryl group takes place from carbonyl carbon of the amide
to the nitrogen atom. The amine so formed contains one carbon less
than that present in the amide.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 99999.....22222 Write chemical equations for the following conversions:
(i) CH –CH –Cl into CH –CH –CH –NH
3 2 3 2 2 2
(ii) C H –CH –Cl into C H –CH –CH –NH
6 5 2 6 5 2 2 2
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
Chemistry 264
Rationalised 2023-24Write structures and IUPAC names of EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 99999.....33333
(i) the amide which gives propanamine by Hoffmann bromamide
reaction.
(ii) the amine produced by the Hoffmann degradation of benzamide.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(i) Propanamine contains three carbons. Hence, the amide molecule must
contain four carbon atoms. Structure and IUPAC name of the starting
amide with four carbon atoms are given below:
Butanamide
(ii) Benzamide is an aromatic amide containing seven carbon atoms.
Hence, the amine formed from benzamide is aromatic primary amine
containing six carbon atoms.
Aniline or benzenamine
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
9.3 How will you convert
(i) Benzene into aniline (ii) Benzene into N, N-dimethylaniline
(iii) Cl–(CH ) –Cl into hexan-1,6-diamine?
2 4
99999.....55555 PPPPPhhhhhyyyyysssssiiiiicccccaaaaalllll The lower aliphatic amines are gases with fishy odour. Primary amines
with three or more carbon atoms are liquid and still higher ones are
PPPPPrrrrrooooopppppeeeeerrrrrtttttiiiiieeeeesssss
solid. Aniline and other arylamines are usually colourless but get
coloured on storage due to atmospheric oxidation.
Lower aliphatic amines are soluble in water because they can form
hydrogen bonds with water molecules. However, solubility decreases
with increase in molar mass of amines due to increase in size of the
hydrophobic alkyl part. Higher amines are essentially insoluble in water.
Considering the electronegativity of nitrogen of amine and oxygen of
alcohol as 3.0 and 3.5 respectively, you can predict the pattern of
solubility of amines and alcohols in water. Out of butan-1-ol and
butan-1-amine, which will be more soluble in water and why? Amines
are soluble in organic solvents like alcohol, ether and benzene. You
may remember that alcohols are more polar than amines and form
stronger intermolecular hydrogen bonds than amines.
Primary and secondary amines are engaged in intermolecular
association due to hydrogen bonding between nitrogen of one and
hydrogen of another molecule. This intermolecular association is more
in primary amines than in secondary amines as there are two hydrogen
atoms available for hydrogen bond formation in it. Tertiary amines do
not have intermolecular association due to the absence of hydrogen
atom available for hydrogen bond formation. Therefore, the order of
boiling points of isomeric amines is as follows:
265 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24Primary > Secondary > Tertiary
Intermolecular hydrogen bonding in primary amines is shown in
Fig. 9.2.
Fig. 9.2 Intermolecular hydrogen bonding in primary amines
Boiling points of amines, alcohols and alkanes of almost the same
molar mass are shown in Table 9.2.
Table 9.2: Comparison of Boiling Points of Amines, Alcohols and
Alkanes of Similar Molecular Masses
Sl. No. Compound Molar mass b.p./K
1. n-C H NH 73 350.8
4 9 2
2. (C H ) NH 73 329.3
2 52
3. C H N(CH ) 73 310.5
2 5 32
4. C H CH(CH ) 72 300.8
2 5 32
5. n-C H OH 74 390.3
4 9
99999.....66666 CCCCChhhhheeeeemmmmmiiiiicccccaaaaalllll Difference in electronegativity between nitrogen and hydrogen atoms and
the presence of unshared pair of electrons over the nitrogen atom makes
RRRRReeeeeaaaaaccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
amines reactive. The number of hydrogen atoms attached to nitrogen
atom also decides the course of reaction of amines; that is why primary
(–NH ), secondary N H and tertiary amines N differ in many
2
reactions. Moreover, amines behave as nucleophiles due to the presence
of unshared electron pair. Some of the reactions of amines are described
below:
1. Basic character of amines
Amines, being basic in nature, react with acids to form salts.
Chemistry 266
Rationalised 2023-24Amine salts on treatment with a base like NaOH, regenerate the
parent amine.
Amine salts are soluble in water but insoluble in organic solvents
like ether. This reaction is the basis for the separation of amines from
the non basic organic compounds insoluble in water.
The reaction of amines with mineral acids to form ammonium salts
shows that these are basic in nature. Amines have an unshared pair
of electrons on nitrogen atom due to which they behave as Lewis base.
Basic character of amines can be better understood in terms of their K
b
and pK values as explained below:
b
   
RNH OH
3
K =
R NH H O
2 2
   
R NH OH
or K[H O] = 3
2 RNH 
2
   
R NH OH
or K = 3
b R NH 
2
pK = –log K
b b
Larger the value of K or smaller the value of pK , stronger is the
b b
base. The pK values of few amines are given in Table 9.3.
b
pK value of ammonia is 4.75. Aliphatic amines are stronger bases
b
than ammonia due to +I effect of alkyl groups leading to high electron
density on the nitrogen atom. Their pK values lie in the range of 3 to
b
4.22. On the other hand, aromatic amines are weaker bases than
ammonia due to the electron withdrawing nature of the aryl group.
Table 9.3: pK Values of Amines in Aqueous Phase
b
Name of amine pK
b
Methanamine 3.38
N-Methylmethanamine 3.27
N,N-Dimethylmethanamine 4.22
Ethanamine 3.29
N-Ethylethanamine 3.00
N,N-Diethylethanamine 3.25
Benzenamine 9.38
Phenylmethanamine 4.70
N-Methylaniline 9.30
N,N-Dimethylaniline 8.92
267 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24You may find some discrepancies while trying to interpret the K
b
values of amines on the basis of +I or –I effect of the substituents
present in amines. Besides inductive effect, there are other effects like
solvation effect, steric hinderance, etc., which affect the basic strength
of amines. Just ponder over. You may get the answer in the following
paragraphs.
Structure-basicity relationship of amines
Basicity of amines is related to their structure. Basic character of an
amine depends upon the ease of formation of the cation by accepting
a proton from the acid. The more stable the cation is relative to the
amine, more basic is the amine.
(a) Alkanamines versus ammonia
Let us consider the reaction of an alkanamine and ammonia with
a proton to compare their basicity.
Due to the electron releasing nature of alkyl group, it (R) pushes
electrons towards nitrogen and thus makes the unshared electron
pair more available for sharing with the proton of the acid. Moreover,
the substituted ammonium ion formed from the amine gets stabilised
due to dispersal of the positive charge by the +I effect of the alkyl
group. Hence, alkylamines are stronger bases than ammonia.
Thus, the basic nature of aliphatic amines should increase with
increase in the number of alkyl groups. This trend is followed in
the gaseous phase. The order of basicity of amines in the gaseous
phase follows the expected order: tertiary amine > secondary amine
> primary amine > NH . The trend is not regular in the aqueous
3
state as evident by their pK values given in Table 9.3. In the
b
aqueous phase, the substituted ammonium cations get stabilised
not only by electron releasing effect of the alkyl group (+I) but also
by solvation with water molecules. The greater the size of the ion,
lesser will be the solvation and the less stabilised is the ion. The
order of stability of ions are as follows:
Decreasing order of extent of H-bonding in water and order of
stability of ions by solvation.
Chemistry 268
Rationalised 2023-24Greater is the stability of the substituted ammonium cation, stronger
should be the corresponding amine as a base. Thus, the order of basicity
of aliphatic amines should be: primary > secondary > tertiary, which
is opposite to the inductive effect based order. Secondly, when the
alkyl group is small, like –CH group, there is no steric hindrance to
3
H-bonding. In case the alkyl group is bigger than CH group, there will
3
be steric hinderance to H-bonding. Therefore, the change of nature of
the alkyl group, e.g., from –CH to –C H results in change of the order
3 2 5
of basic strength. Thus, there is a subtle interplay of the inductive
effect, solvation effect and steric hinderance of the alkyl group which
decides the basic strength of alkyl amines in the aqueous state. The
order of basic strength in case of methyl substituted amines and ethyl
substituted amines in aqueous solution is as follows:
(C H ) NH > (C H ) N > C H NH > NH
2 5 2 2 5 3 2 5 2 3
(CH ) NH > CH NH > (CH ) N > NH
3 2 3 2 3 3 3
(b) Arylamines versus ammonia
pK value of aniline is quite high. Why is it so? It is because in
b
aniline or other arylamines, the -NH group is attached directly to
2
the benzene ring. It results in the unshared electron pair on nitrogen
atom to be in conjugation with the benzene ring and thus making
it less available for protonation. If you write different resonating
structures of aniline, you will find that aniline is a resonance
hybrid of the following five structures.
On the other hand, anilinium ion obtained by accepting a proton
can have only two resonating structures (kekule).
We know that greater the number of resonating structures, greater
is the stability. Thus you can infer that aniline (five resonating
structures) is more stable than anilinium ion. Hence, the proton
acceptability or the basic nature of aniline or other aromatic amines
would be less than that of ammonia. In case of substituted aniline, it
is observed that electron releasing groups like –OCH , –CH increase
3 3
basic strength whereas electron withdrawing groups like –NO , –SO H,
2 3
–COOH, –X decrease it.
269 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 99999.....44444
Arrange the following in decreasing order of their basic strength:
C H NH , C H NH , (C H ) NH, NH
6 5 2 2 5 2 2 52 3
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn The decreasing order of basic strength of the above amines and ammonia
follows the following order:
(C H ) NH > C H NH > NH > C H NH
2 52 2 5 2 3 6 5 2
2.Alkylation
Amines undergo alkylation on reaction with alkyl halides (refer Unit
6, Class XII).
3.Acylation
Aliphatic and aromatic primary and secondary amines react with
acid chlorides, anhydrides and esters by nucleophilic substitution
reaction. This reaction is known as acylation. You can consider
this reaction as the replacement of hydrogen atom of –NH or >N–H
2
group by the acyl group. The products obtained by acylation reaction
are known as amides. The reaction is carried out in the presence of
a base stronger than the amine, like pyridine, which removes HCl so
formed and shifts the equilibrium to the right hand side.
Amines also react with benzoyl chloride (C H COCl). This reaction
6 5
is known as benzoylation.
CH NH  C H COCl  CH NHCOC H HCl
3 2 6 5 3 6 5
Methanamine Benzoyl chloride NMethylbenzamide
What do you think is the product of the reaction of amines with
carboxylic acids ? They form salts with amines at room temperature.
Chemistry 270
Rationalised 2023-244. Carbylamine reaction
Aliphatic and aromatic primary amines on heating with chloroform
and ethanolic potassium hydroxide form isocyanides or carbylamines
which are foul smelling substances. Secondary and tertiary amines
do not show this reaction. This reaction is known as carbylamine
reaction or isocyanide test and is used as a test for primary amines.
5. Reaction with nitrous acid
Three classes of amines react differently with nitrous acid which is
prepared in situ from a mineral acid and sodium nitrite.
(a) Primary aliphatic amines react with nitrous acid to form aliphatic
diazonium salts which being unstable, liberate nitrogen gas
quantitatively and alcohols. Quantitative evolution of nitrogen is
used in estimation of amino acids and proteins.
(b) Aromatic amines react with nitrous acid at low temperatures
(273-278 K) to form diazonium salts, a very important class of
compounds used for synthesis of a variety of aromatic compounds
discussed in Section 9.7.
Secondary and tertiary amines react with nitrous acid in a
different manner.
6. Reaction with arylsulphonyl chloride
Benzenesulphonyl chloride (C H SO Cl), which is also known as
6 5 2
Hinsberg’s reagent, reacts with primary and secondary amines to
form sulphonamides.
(a)The reaction of benzenesulphonyl chloride with primary amine
yields N-ethylbenzenesulphonyl amide.
The hydrogen attached to nitrogen in sulphonamide is strongly
acidic due to the presence of strong electron withdrawing sulphonyl
group. Hence, it is soluble in alkali.
(b) In the reaction with secondary amine, N,N-diethyl-
benzenesulphonamide is formed.
O O
S Cl + H N C H S N C H + HCl
2 5 2 5
O C H O C H
2 5 2 5
N,N-Diethylbenzenesulphonamide
271 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24Since N, N-diethylbenzene sulphonamide does not contain any
hydrogen atom attached to nitrogen atom, it is not acidic and hence
insoluble in alkali.
(c) Tertiary amines do not react with benzenesulphonyl chloride.
This property of amines reacting with benzenesulphonyl chloride
in a different manner is used for the distinction of primary,
secondary and tertiary amines and also for the separation of a
mixture of amines. However, these days benzenesulphonyl
chloride is replaced by p-toluenesulphonyl chloride.
7. Electrophilic substitution
You have read earlier that aniline is a resonance hybrid of five
structures. Where do you find the maximum electron density in
these structures? Ortho- and para-positions to the –NH group
2
become centres of high electron density. Thus –NH group is ortho
2
and para directing and a powerful activating group.
(a) Bromination: Aniline reacts with bromine water at room
temperature to give a white precipitate of 2,4,6-tribromoaniline.
The main problem encountered during electrophilic substitution
reactions of aromatic amines is that of their very high reactivity.
Substitution tends to occur at ortho- and para-positions. If we
have to prepare monosubstituted aniline derivative, how can
the activating effect of –NH group be controlled ? This can be
2
done by protecting the -NH group by acetylation with acetic
2
anhydride, then carrying out the desired substitution followed
by hydrolysis of the substituted amide to the substituted amine.
The lone pair of electrons on nitrogen of acetanilide interacts
with oxygen atom due to resonance as shown below:
Chemistry 272
Rationalised 2023-24Hence, the lone pair of electrons on nitrogen is less available for
donation to benzene ring by resonance. Therefore, activating
effect of –NHCOCH group is less than that of amino group.
3
(b) Nitration: Direct nitration of aniline yields tarry oxidation
products in addition to the nitro derivatives. Moreover, in the
strongly acidic medium, aniline is protonated to form the
anilinium ion which is meta directing. That is why besides the
ortho and para derivatives, significant amount of meta derivative
is also formed.
However, by protecting the –NH group by acetylation reaction
2
with acetic anhydride, the nitration reaction can be controlled
and the p-nitro derivative can be obtained as the major product.
(c) Sulphonation: Aniline reacts with concentrated sulphuric acid
to form anilinium hydrogensulphate which on heating with
sulphuric acid at 453-473K produces p-aminobenzene sulphonic
acid, commonly known as sulphanilic acid, as the major product.
Aniline does not undergo Friedel-Crafts reaction (alkylation and
acetylation) due to salt formation with aluminium chloride, the
Lewis acid, which is used as a catalyst. Due to this, nitrogen of
aniline acquires positive charge and hence acts as a strong
deactivating group for further reaction.
273 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
9.4 Arrange the following in increasing order of their basic strength:
(i) C H NH , C H NH , NH , C H CH NH and (C H ) NH
2 5 2 6 5 2 3 6 5 2 2 2 5 2
(ii) C H NH , (C H ) NH, (C H ) N, C H NH
2 5 2 2 5 2 2 5 3 6 5 2
(iii) CH NH , (CH ) NH, (CH ) N, C H NH , C H CH NH .
3 2 32 33 6 5 2 6 5 2 2
9.5 Complete the following acid-base reactions and name the products:
(i) CH CH CH NH + HCl fi (ii) (C H ) N + HCl fi
3 2 2 2 2 5 3
9.6 Write reactions of the final alkylation product of aniline with excess of methyl
iodide in the presence of sodium carbonate solution.
9.7 Write chemical reaction of aniline with benzoyl chloride and write the name of
the product obtained.
9.8 Write structures of different isomers corresponding to the molecular formula,
C H N. Write IUPAC names of the isomers which will liberate nitrogen gas on
3 9
treatment with nitrous acid.
II. DIAZONIUM SALTS
 –
The diazonium salts have the general formula RN X where R stands
2
for an aryl group and X– ion may be Cl– Br,– HSO, BF, etc. They are
4 4
named by suffixing diazonium to the name of the parent hydrocarbon
from which they are formed, followed by the name of anion such as

chloride, hydrogensulphate, etc. The N group is called diazonium
2
 –
group. For example, C H N Cl is named as benzenediazonium
6 5 2
chloride and C H N +HSO – is known as benzenediazonium
6 5 2 4
hydrogensulphate.
Primary aliphatic amines form highly unstable alkyldiazonium salts
(refer to Section 9.6). Primary aromatic amines form arenediazonium
salts which are stable for a short time in solution at low temperatures
(273-278 K). The stability of arenediazonium ion is explained on the
basis of resonance.
99999.....77777 MMMMMeeeeettttthhhhhoooooddddd ooooofffff Benzenediazonium chloride is prepared by the reaction of aniline with
nitrous acid at 273-278K. Nitrous acid is produced in the reaction
PPPPPrrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
mixture by the reaction of sodium nitrite with hydrochloric acid. The
ooooofffff DDDDDiiiiiaaaaazzzzzooooonnnnniiiiiuuuuunnnnn
conversion of primary aromatic amines into diazonium salts is known
SSSSSaaaaallllltttttsssss as diazotisation. Due to its instability, the diazonium salt is not
generally stored and is used immediately after its preparation.
 –
C H NH NaNO 2HCl273278KC H N ClNaCl2H O
6 5 2 2 6 5 2 2
Chemistry 274
Rationalised 2023-2499999.....88888 PPPPPhhhhhyyyyysssssiiiiicccccaaaaalllll Benzenediazonium chloride is a colourless crystalline solid. It is readily
soluble in water and is stable in cold but reacts with water when
PPPPPrrrrrooooopppppeeeeerrrrrtttttiiiiieeeeesssss
warmed. It decomposes easily in the dry state. Benzenediazonium
fluoroborate is water insoluble and stable at room temperature.
99999.....99999 CCCCChhhhheeeeemmmmmiiiiicccccaaaaalllll The reactions of diazonium salts can be broadly divided into two
categories, namely (A) reactions involving displacement of nitrogen and
RRRRReeeeeaaaaaccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
(B) reactions involving retention of diazo group.
A. Reactions involving displacement of nitrogen
Diazonium group being a very good leaving group, is substituted
by other groups such as Cl–, Br– I– CN– and OH– which displace
, ,
nitrogen from the aromatic ring. The nitrogen formed escapes from
the reaction mixture as a gas.
1. Replacement by halide or cyanide ion: The Cl–, Br– and CN–
nucleophiles can easily be introduced in the benzene ring in the
presence of Cu(I) ion. This reaction is called Sandmeyer reaction.
2 2
2 2
Alternatively, chlorine or bromine can also be introduced in the
benzene ring by treating the diazonium salt solution with corresponding
halogen acid in the presence of copper powder. This is referred as
Gatterman reaction.
The yield in Sandmeyer reaction is found to be better than
Gattermann reaction.
2. Replacement by iodide ion: Iodine is not easily introduced into
the benzene ring directly, but, when the diazonium salt solution
is treated with potassium iodide, iodobenzene is formed.
3. Replacement by fluoride ion: When arenediazonium chloride is
treated with fluoroboric acid, arene diazonium fluoroborate is
precipitated which on heating decomposes to yield aryl fluoride.
4. Replacement by H: Certain mild reducing agents like
hypophosphorous acid (phosphinic acid) or ethanol reduce
diazonium salts to arenes and themselves get oxidised to
phosphorous acid and ethanal, respectively.
275 Amines
Rationalised 2023-245. Replacement by hydroxyl group: If the temperature of the
diazonium salt solution is allowed to rise upto 283 K, the salt
gets hydrolysed to phenol.
6. Replacement by –NO group: When diazonium fluoroborate is
2
heated with aqueous sodium nitrite solution in the presence of
copper, the diazonium group is replaced by –NO group.
2
B. Reactions involving retention of diazo group
coupling reactions
The azo products obtained have an extended conjugate system having
both the aromatic rings joined through the –N=N– bond. These compounds
are often coloured and are used as dyes. Benzene diazonium chloride
reacts with phenol in which the phenol molecule at its para position is
coupled with the diazonium salt to formp-hydroxyazobenzene. This
type of reaction is known as coupling reaction. Similarly the reaction of
diazonium salt with aniline yields p-aminoazobenzene. This is an example
of electrophilic substitution reaction.
99999.....1111100000 IIIIImmmmmpppppooooorrrrrtttttaaaaannnnnccccceeeee From the above reactions, it is clear that the diazonium salts are very
good intermediates for the introduction of –F, –Cl, –Br, –I, –CN, –OH,
ooooofffff DDDDDiiiiiaaaaazzzzzooooonnnnniiiiiuuuuummmmm
–NO groups into the aromatic ring.
SSSSSaaaaallllltttttsssss iiiiinnnnn 2
Aryl fluorides and iodides cannot be prepared by direct halogenation.
SSSSSyyyyynnnnnttttthhhhheeeeesssssiiiiisssss The cyano group cannot be introduced by nucleophilic substitution of
ooooofffff AAAAArrrrrooooommmmmaaaaatttttiiiiiccccc chlorine in chlorobenzene but cyanobenzene can be easily obtained
from diazonium salt.
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
Thus, the replacement of diazo group by other groups is helpful in
Chemistry 276
Rationalised 2023-24preparing those substituted aromatic compounds which cannot be
prepared by direct substitution in benzene or substituted benzene.
How will you convert 4-nitrotoluene to 2-bromobenzoic acid ? EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 99999.....55555
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
9.9 Convert
(i) 3-Methylaniline into 3-nitrotoluene.
(ii) Aniline into 1,3,5 - tribromobenzene.
SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy
Amines can be considered as derivatives of ammonia obtained by replacement of
hydrogen atoms with alkyl or aryl groups. Replacement of one hydrogen atom of
ammonia gives rise to structure of the type R-NH , known as primary amine.
2
Secondary amines are characterised by the structure R NH or R-NHR¢¢¢¢¢ and tertiary
2
amines by R N, RNR¢¢¢¢¢R¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢¢ or R NR¢¢¢¢¢..... Secondary and tertiary amines are known as
3 2
simple amines if the alkyl or aryl groups are the same and mixed amines if the
groups are different. Like ammonia, all the three types of amines have one unshared
electron pair on nitrogen atom due to which they behave as Lewis bases.
Amines are usually formed from nitro compounds, halides, amides, imides, etc.
They exhibit hydrogen bonding which influence their physical properties. In
alkylamines, a combination of electron releasing, steric and H-bonding factors
influence the stability of the substituted ammonium cations in protic polar solvents
and thus affect the basic nature of amines. Alkyl amines are found to be stronger
bases than ammonia. In aromatic amines, electron releasing and withdrawing groups,
respectively increase and decrease their basic character. Aniline is a weaker base
277 Amines
Rationalised 2023-24than ammonia. Reactions of amines are governed by availability of the unshared pair
of electrons on nitrogen. Influence of the number of hydrogen atoms at nitrogen atom
on the type of reactions and nature of products is responsible for identification and
distinction between primary, secondary and tertiary amines. p-Toluenesulphonyl chloride
is used for the identification of primary, secondary and tertiary amines. Presence of
amino group in aromatic ring enhances reactivity of the aromatic amines. Reactivity of
aromatic amines can be controlled by acylation process, i.e., by treating with acetyl
chloride or acetic anhydride. Tertiary amines like trimethylamine are used as insect
attractants.
Aryldiazonium salts, usually obtained from arylamines, undergo replacement of
the diazonium group with a variety of nucleophiles to provide advantageous methods
for producing aryl halides, cyanides, phenols and arenes by reductive removal of the
diazo group. Coupling reaction of aryldiazonium salts with phenols or arylamines give
rise to the formation of azo dyes.
Exercises
9.1 Write IUPAC names of the following compounds and classify them into primary,
secondary and tertiary amines.
(i) (CH ) CHNH (ii) CH (CH ) NH (iii) CH NHCH(CH )
32 2 3 2 2 2 3 3 2
(iv) (CH ) CNH (v) C H NHCH (vi) (CH CH ) NCH
3 3 2 6 5 3 3 2 2 3
(vii) m–BrC H NH
6 4 2
9.2 Give one chemical test to distinguish between the following pairs of compounds.
(i) Methylamine and dimethylamine (ii) Secondary and tertiary amines
(iii) Ethylamine and aniline (iv) Aniline and benzylamine
(v) Aniline and N-methylaniline.
9.3 Account for the following:
(i) pK of aniline is more than that of methylamine.
b
(ii) Ethylamine is soluble in water whereas aniline is not.
(iii) Methylamine in water reacts with ferric chloride to precipitate hydrated
ferric oxide.
(iv) Although amino group is o– and p– directing in aromatic electrophilic
substitution reactions, aniline on nitration gives a substantial amount of
m-nitroaniline.
(v) Aniline does not undergo Friedel-Crafts reaction.
(vi) Diazonium salts of aromatic amines are more stable than those of aliphatic
amines.
(vii) Gabriel phthalimide synthesis is preferred for synthesising primary amines.
9.4 Arrange the following:
(i) In decreasing order of the pK values:
b
C H NH , C H NHCH , (C H ) NH and C H NH
2 5 2 6 5 3 2 52 6 5 2
(ii) In increasing order of basic strength:
C H NH , C H N(CH ) , (C H ) NH and CH NH
6 5 2 6 5 32 2 5 2 3 2
(iii) In increasing order of basic strength:
(a) Aniline, p-nitroaniline and p-toluidine
Chemistry 278
Rationalised 2023-24(b) C H NH , C H NHCH , C H CH NH .
6 5 2 6 5 3 6 5 2 2
(iv) In decreasing order of basic strength in gas phase:
C H NH , (C H ) NH, (C H ) N and NH
2 5 2 2 52 2 53 3
(v) In increasing order of boiling point:
C H OH, (CH ) NH, C H NH
2 5 32 2 5 2
(vi) In increasing order of solubility in water:
C H NH , (C H ) NH, C H NH .
6 5 2 2 52 2 5 2
9.5 How will you convert:
(i) Ethanoic acid into methanamine
(ii) Hexanenitrile into 1-aminopentane
(iii) Methanol to ethanoic acid
(iv) Ethanamine into methanamine
(v) Ethanoic acid into propanoic acid
(vi) Methanamine into ethanamine
(vii) Nitromethane into dimethylamine
(viii) Propanoic acid into ethanoic acid?
9.6 Describe a method for the identification of primary, secondary and tertiary amines.
Also write chemical equations of the reactions involved.
9.7 Write short notes on the following:
(i) Carbylamine reaction (ii) Diazotisation
(iii) Hofmann’s bromamide reaction (iv) Coupling reaction
(v) Ammonolysis (vi) Acetylation
(vii) Gabriel phthalimide synthesis.
9.8 Accomplish the following conversions:
(i) Nitrobenzene to benzoic acid
(ii) Benzene to m-bromophenol
(iii) Benzoic acid to aniline
(iv) Aniline to 2,4,6-tribromofluorobenzene
(v) Benzyl chloride to 2-phenylethanamine
(vi) Chlorobenzene to p-chloroaniline
(vii) Aniline to p-bromoaniline
(viii) Benzamide to toluene
(ix) Aniline to benzyl alcohol.
9.9 Give the structures of A, B and C in the following reactions:
(i) CH CH INaCNA OH BNaOHBr 2C
3 2 Partial hydrolysis
(ii) C H N ClCuCNA H 2O/H BNH3 C
6 5 2 
(iii) CH CH BrKCN A LiAlH 4BHNO 2C
3 2 0C
(iv) C H NO Fe/HCl A NaNO 2HClBH 2O/H C
6 5 2 273K 
(v) CH COOHNH3 ANaOBrBNaNO 2/HClC
3 
(vi) C H NO Fe/HCl A HNO 2BC 6H5OHC
6 5 2 273K
279 Amines
Rationalised 2023-249.10 An aromatic compound ‘A’ on treatment with aqueous ammonia and heating
forms compound ‘B’ which on heating with Br and KOH forms a compound ‘C’
2
of molecular formula C H N. Write the structures and IUPAC names of compounds
6 7
A, B and C.
9.11 Complete the following reactions:
(i) C H NH CHCl alc.KOH
6 5 2 3
(ii) C H N ClH PO H O 
6 5 2 3 2 2
(iii) C H NH H SO conc. 
6 5 2 2 4
(iv) C H N ClC H OH
6 5 2 2 5
(v) C H NH Br aq 
6 5 2 2
(vi) C H NH CH CO O
6 5 2 3 2
(vii) C H N CliHBF 4 
6 5 2 iiNaNO 2/Cu,
9.12 Why cannot aromatic primary amines be prepared by Gabriel phthalimide
synthesis?
9.13 Write the reactions of (i) aromatic and (ii) aliphatic primary amines with nitrous
acid.
9.14 Give plausible explanation for each of the following:
(i) Why are amines less acidic than alcohols of comparable molecular masses?
(ii) Why do primary amines have higher boiling point than tertiary amines?
(iii) Why are aliphatic amines stronger bases than aromatic amines?
Answers to Some Intext Questions
9.4 (i) C H NH < NH < C H CH NH < C H NH < (C H ) NH
6 5 2 3 6 5 2 2 2 5 2 2 52
(ii) C H NH < C H NH < (C H ) N < (C H ) NH
6 5 2 2 5 2. 2 53 2 52
(iii) C H NH < C H CH NH < (CH ) N < CH NH < (CH ) NH
6 5 2 6 5 2 2 3 3 3 2 3 2
Chemistry 280
Rationalised 2023-24