Wave Optics
Chapter Ten
WAVE OPTICS
10.1 I
NTRODUCTION
In 1637 Descartes gave the corpuscular model of light and derived Snell’s
law. It explained the laws of reflection and refraction of light at an interface.
The corpuscular model predicted that if the ray of light (on refraction)
bends towards the normal then the speed of light would be greater in the
second medium. This corpuscular model of light was further developed
by Isaac Newton in his famous book entitled OPTICKS and because of
the tremendous popularity of this book, the corpuscular model is very
often attributed to Newton.
In 1678, the Dutch physicist Christiaan Huygens put forward the
wave theory of light – it is this wave model of light that we will discuss in
this chapter. As we will see, the wave model could satisfactorily explain
the phenomena of reflection and refraction; however, it predicted that on
refraction if the wave bends towards the normal then the speed of light
would be less in the second medium. This is in contradiction to the
prediction made by using the corpuscular model of light. It was much
later confirmed by experiments where it was shown that the speed of
light in water is less than the speed in air confirming the prediction of the
wave model; Foucault carried out this experiment in 1850.
The wave theory was not readily accepted primarily because of
Newton’s authority and also because light could travel through vacuu2m55
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
and it was felt that a wave would always require a medium to propagate
from one point to the other. However, when Thomas Young performed
his famous interference experiment in 1801, it was firmly established
that light is indeed a wave phenomenon. The wavelength of visible
light was measured and found to be extremely small; for example, the
wavelength of yellow light is about 0.6 mm. Because of the smallness
of the wavelength of visible light (in comparison to the dimensions of
typical mirrors and lenses), light can be assumed to approximately
travel in straight lines. This is the field of geometrical optics, which we
had discussed in the previous chapter. Indeed, the branch of optics in
which one completely neglects the finiteness of the wavelength is called
geometrical optics and a ray is defined as the path of energy
propagation in the limit of wavelength tending to zero.
After the interference experiment of Young in 1801, for the next 40
years or so, many experiments were carried out involving the
interference and diffraction of lightwaves; these experiments could only
be satisfactorily explained by assuming a wave model of light. Thus,
around the middle of the nineteenth century, the wave theory seemed
to be very well established. The only major difficulty was that since it
was thought that a wave required a medium for its propagation, how
could light waves propagate through vacuum. This was explained
when Maxwell put forward his famous electromagnetic theory of light.
Maxwell had developed a set of equations describing the laws of
electricity and magnetism and using these equations he derived what
is known as the wave equation from which he predicted the existence
of electromagnetic waves*. From the wave equation, Maxwell could
calculate the speed of electromagnetic waves in free space and he found
that the theoretical value was very close to the measured value of speed
of light. From this, he propounded that light must be an
electromagnetic wave. Thus, according to Maxwell, light waves are
associated with changing electric and magnetic fields; changing electric
field produces a time and space varying magnetic field and a changing
magnetic field produces a time and space varying electric field. The
changing electric and magnetic fields result in the propagation of
electromagnetic waves (or light waves) even in vacuum.
In this chapter we will first discuss the original formulation of the
Huygens principle and derive the laws of reflection and refraction. In
Sections 10.4 and 10.5, we will discuss the phenomenon of interference
which is based on the principle of superposition. In Section 10.6 we
will discuss the phenomenon of diffraction which is based on Huygens-
Fresnel principle. Finally in Section 10.7 we will discuss the
phenomenon of polarisation which is based on the fact that the light
waves are transverse electromagnetic waves.
* Maxwell had predicted the existence of electromagnetic waves around 1855; it
was much later (around 1890) that Heinrich Hertz produced radiowaves in the
laboratory. J.C. Bose and G. Marconi made practical applications of the Hertzian
256
waves
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
10.2 H P
UYGENS RINCIPLE
We would first define a wavefront: when we drop a small stone on a
calm pool of water, waves spread out from the point of impact. Every
point on the surface starts oscillating with time. At any instant, a
photograph of the surface would show circular rings on which the
disturbance is maximum. Clearly, all points on such a circle are
oscillating in phase because they are at the same distance from the
source. Such a locus of points, which oscillate in phase is called a
wavefront; thus a wavefront is defined as a surface of constant
FIGURE 10.1 (a) A
phase. The speed with which the wavefront moves outwards from the
diverging spherical
source is called the speed of the wave. The energy of the wave travels
wave emanating from
in a direction perpendicular to the wavefront.
a point source. The
If we have a point source emitting waves uniformly in all directions, wavefronts are
then the locus of points which have the same amplitude and vibrate in spherical.
the same phase are spheres and we have what is known as a spherical
wave as shown in Fig. 10.1(a). At a large distance from the source, a
small portion of the sphere can be considered as a plane and we have
what is known as a plane wave [Fig. 10.1(b)].
Now, if we know the shape of the wavefront at t = 0, then Huygens
principle allows us to determine the shape of the wavefront at a later
time t. Thus, Huygens principle is essentially a geometrical construction,
which given the shape of the wafefront at any time allows us to determine
the shape of the wavefront at a later time. Let us consider a diverging
FIGURE 10.1 (b) At a
wave and let F F represent a portion of the spherical wavefront at t = 0
1 2 large distance from
(Fig. 10.2). Now, according to Huygens principle, each point of the the source, a small
wavefront is the source of a secondary disturbance and the wavelets portion of the
emanating from these points spread out in all directions with the speed spherical wave can
of the wave. These wavelets emanating from the wavefront are usually be approximated by a
plane wave.
referred to as secondary wavelets and if we draw a common tangent
to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the wavefront at a
later time.
FIGURE 10.2 F F represents the spherical wavefront (with O as
1 2
centre) at t = 0. The envelope of the secondary wavelets
emanating from F F produces the forward moving wavefront G G .
1 2 1 2
The backwave D D does not exist.
1 2 257
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
Thus, if we wish to determine the shape of the wavefront at t = t, we
draw spheres of radius vt from each point on the spherical wavefront
where v represents the speed of the waves in the medium. If we now draw
a common tangent to all these spheres, we obtain the new position of the
wavefront at t = t. The new wavefront shown as G G in Fig. 10.2 is again
1 2
spherical with point O as the centre.
The above model has one shortcoming: we also have a backwave which
is shown as D D in Fig. 10.2. Huygens argued that the amplitude of the
1 2
secondary wavelets is maximum in the forward direction and zero in the
backward direction; by making this adhoc assumption, Huygens could
explain the absence of the backwave. However, this adhoc assumption is
not satisfactory and the absence of the backwave is really justified from
more rigorous wave theory.
In a similar manner, we can use Huygens principle to determine the
shape of the wavefront for a plane wave propagating through a medium
(Fig. 10.3).
FIGURE 10.3
Huygens geometrical
10.3 R R
EFRACTION AND EFLECTION OF
construction for a
plane wave P W H P
LANE AVES USING UYGENS RINCIPLE
propagating to the
right. F F is the
1 2 10.3.1 Refraction of a plane wave
plane wavefront at
t = 0 and G G is the We will now use Huygens principle to derive the laws of refraction. Let PP¢
1 2
wavefront at a later represent the surface separating medium 1 and medium 2, as shown in
time t. The lines A A , Fig. 10.4. Let v and v represent the speed of light in medium 1 and
B B … etc., are1 2 1 2
1 2 medium 2, respectively. We assume a plane wavefront AB propagating in
normal to both F F
1 2 the direction A¢A incident on the interface at an angle i as shown in the
and G G and
1 2 figure. Let t be the time taken by the wavefront to travel the distance BC.
represent rays.
Thus,
BC = v t
1
FIGURE 10.4 A plane wave AB is incident at an angle i on the surface
PP¢ separating medium 1 and medium 2. The plane wave undergoes
refraction and CE represents the refracted wavefront. The figure
corresponds to v < v so that the refracted waves bends towards the
2 1
258 normal.
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
In order to determine the shape of the refracted
wavefront, we draw a sphere of radius v t from the point
2
A in the second medium (the speed of the wave in the
second medium is v ). Let CE represent a tangent plane
2
drawn from the point C on to the sphere. Then, AE = v t
2
and CE would represent the refracted wavefront. If we
now consider the triangles ABC and AEC, we readily
obtain
BC v t
sin i = = 1 (10.1)
AC AC
and
AE v t
sin r = = 2 (10.2)
AC AC
where i and r are the angles of incidence and refraction,
respectively. Thus we obtain
sini v
= 1
(10.3)
sinr v
2
From the above equation, we get the important result
that if r < i (i.e., if the ray bends toward the normal), the
speed of the light wave in the second medium (v ) will be
2
less then the speed of the light wave in the first medium
(v ). This prediction is opposite to the prediction from
1
the corpuscular model of light and as later experiments
showed, the prediction of the wave theory is correct. Now,
if c represents the speed of light in vacuum, then,
c
n =
1 v (10.4) 1
and
c
n = (10.5)
2 v
2
are known as the refractive indices of medium 1 and
medium 2, respectively. In terms of the refractive indices, Eq. (10.3) can
be written as
n sin i = n sin r (10.6)
1 2
This is the Snell’s law of refraction. Further, if l and l denote the
1 2
wavelengths of light in medium 1 and medium 2, respectively and if the
distance BC is equal to l then the distance AE will be equal to l (because
1 2
if the crest from B has reached C in time t, then the crest from A should
have also reached E in time t); thus,
l BC v
1 = = 1
l AE v
2 2
or
v v
l1 = l 2 (10.7) 259
1 2
CHRISTIAAN
HUYGENS
(1629
–
1695)
Christiaan Huygens
(1629 – 1695) Dutch
physicist, astronomer,
mathematician and the
founder of the wave
theory of light. His book,
Treatise on light, makes
fascinating reading even
today. He brilliantly
explained the double
refraction shown by the
mineral calcite in this
work in addition to
reflection and refraction.
He was the first to
analyse circular and
simple harmonic motion
and designed and built
improved clocks and
telescopes. He discovered
the true geometry of
Saturn’s rings.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
The above equation implies that when a wave gets refracted into a
denser medium (v > v ) the wavelength and the speed of propagation
1 2
decrease but the frequency n (= v/l) remains the same.
10.3.2 Refraction at a rarer medium
We now consider refraction of a plane wave at a rarer medium, i.e.,
v > v . Proceeding in an exactly similar manner we can construct a
2 1
refracted wavefront as shown in Fig. 10.5. The angle of refraction
will now be greater than angle of incidence; however, we will still have
n sin i = n sin r . We define an angle i by the following equation
1 2 c
n
sini = 2
c n (10.8)
1
Thus, if i = i then sin r = 1 and r = 90°. Obviously, for i > i , there can
c c
not be any refracted wave. The angle i is known as the critical angle and
c
for all angles of incidence greater than the critical angle, we will not have
any refracted wave and the wave will undergo what is known as total
internal reflection. The phenomenon of total internal reflection and its
applications was discussed in Section 9.4.
260
tceffe
relppoD
dna
ecnanoser
,noitcarfer
,noitcarffid
,ecnerefretni
fo
noitartsnomeD
/elppir/moc.datslaf.www//:ptth
FIGURE 10.5 Refraction of a plane wave incident on a
rarer medium for which v > v . The plane wave bends
2 1
away from the normal.
10.3.3 Reflection of a plane wave by a plane surface
We next consider a plane wave AB incident at an angle i on a reflecting
surface MN. If v represents the speed of the wave in the medium and if t
represents the time taken by the wavefront to advance from the point B
to C then the distance
BC = vt
In order to construct the reflected wavefront we draw a sphere of
radius vt from the point A as shown in Fig. 10.6. Let CE represent the
tangent plane drawn from the point C to this sphere. Obviously
AE = BC = vt
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
FIGURE 10.6 Reflection of a plane wave AB by the reflecting surface MN.
AB and CE represent incident and reflected wavefronts.
If we now consider the triangles EAC and BAC we will find that they
are congruent and therefore, the angles i and r (as shown in Fig. 10.6)
would be equal. This is the law of reflection.
Once we have the laws of reflection and refraction, the behaviour of
prisms, lenses, and mirrors can be understood. These phenomena were
discussed in detail in Chapter 9 on the basis of rectilinear propagation of
light. Here we just describe the behaviour of the wavefronts as they
undergo reflection or refraction. In Fig. 10.7(a) we consider a plane wave
passing through a thin prism. Clearly, since the speed of light waves is
less in glass, the lower portion of the incoming wavefront (which travels
through the greatest thickness of glass) will get delayed resulting in a tilt
in the emerging wavefront as shown in the figure. In Fig. 10.7(b) we
consider a plane wave incident on a thin convex lens; the central part of
the incident plane wave traverses the thickest portion of the lens and is
delayed the most. The emerging wavefront has a depression at the centre
and therefore the wavefront becomes spherical and converges to the point
F which is known as the focus. In Fig. 10.7(c) a plane wave is incident on
a concave mirror and on reflection we have a spherical wave converging
to the focal point F. In a similar manner, we can understand refraction
and reflection by concave lenses and convex mirrors.
From the above discussion it follows that the total time taken from a
point on the object to the corresponding point on the image is the same
measured along any ray. For example, when a convex lens focusses light
to form a real image, although the ray going through the centre traverses
a shorter path, but because of the slower speed in glass, the time taken
is the same as for rays travelling near the edge of the lens.
FIGURE 10.7 Refraction of a plane wave by (a) a thin prism, (b) a convex lens.
261
(c) Reflection of a plane wave by a concave mirror.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
10.4 C I
OHERENT AND NCOHERENT
A W
DDITION OF AVES
In this section we will discuss the
interference pattern produced by the
superposition of two waves. You may recall
that we had discussed the superposition
principle in Chapter 14 of your Class XI
textbook. Indeed the entire field of
interference is based on the superposition
principle according to which at a particular
point in the medium, the resultant
displacement produced by a number of
waves is the vector sum of the displace-
ments produced by each of the waves.
Consider two needles S and S moving
1 2
periodically up and down in an identical
fashion in a trough of water [Fig. 10.8(a)]. They produce two water waves,
and at a particular point, the phase difference between the displacements
produced by each of the waves does not change with time; when this
happens the two sources are said to be coherent. Figure 10.8(b) shows
the position of crests (solid circles) and troughs (dashed circles) at a given
instant of time. Consider a point P for which
262
S P = S P
1 2
1.01
ELPMAXE
Example 10.1
(a) When monochromatic light is incident on a surface separating
two media, the reflected and refracted light both have the same
frequency as the incident frequency. Explain why?
(b) When light travels from a rarer to a denser medium, the speed
decreases. Does the reduction in speed imply a reduction in the
energy carried by the light wave?
(c) In the wave picture of light, intensity of light is determined by the
square of the amplitude of the wave. What determines the intensity
of light in the photon picture of light.
Solution
(a) Reflection and refraction arise through interaction of incident light
with the atomic constituents of matter. Atoms may be viewed as
oscillators, which take up the frequency of the external agency
(light) causing forced oscillations. The frequency of light emitted by
a charged oscillator equals its frequency of oscillation. Thus, the
frequency of scattered light equals the frequency of incident light.
(b) No. Energy carried by a wave depends on the amplitude of the
wave, not on the speed of wave propagation.
(c) For a given frequency, intensity of light in the photon picture is
determined by the number of photons crossing an unit area per
unit time.
(a) (b)
FIGURE 10.8 (a) Two needles oscillating in
phase in water represent two coherent sources.
(b) The pattern of displacement of water
molecules at an instant on the surface of water
showing nodal N (no displacement) and
antinodal A (maximum displacement) lines.
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
Since the distances S P and S P are equal, waves from S and S will
1 2 1 2
take the same time to travel to the point P and waves that emanate from
S and S in phase will also arrive, at the point P, in phase.
1 2
Thus, if the displacement produced by the source S at the point P is
1
given by
y = a cos wt
1
then, the displacement produced by the source S (at the point P) will
2
also be given by
y = a cos wt
2
Thus, the resultant of displacement at P would be given by
y = y + y = 2 a cos wt
1 2
Since the intensity is proportional to the square of the amplitude, the
resultant intensity will be given by
I = 4 I
0
where I represents the intensity produced by each one of the individual
0
sources; I is proportional to a2. In fact at any point on the perpendicular
0
bisector of S S , the intensity will be 4I . The two sources are said to
1 2 0 FIGURE 10.9
interfere constructively and we have what is referred to as constructive
(a) Constructive
interference. We next consider a point Q [Fig. 10.9(a)]
interference at a
for which
point Q for which the
S Q –S Q = 2l path difference is 2l.
2 1
(b) Destructive
The waves emanating from S will arrive exactly two cycles earlier interference at a
1
than the waves from S and will again be in phase [Fig. 10.9(a)]. Thus, if point R for which the
2
the displacement produced by S is given by path difference is
1
2.5 l.
y = a cos wt
1
then the displacement produced by S will be given by
2
y = a cos (wt – 4p) = a cos wt
2
where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2l corresponds to a
phase difference of 4p. The two displacements are once again in phase
and the intensity will again be 4 I giving rise to constructive interference.
0
In the above analysis we have assumed that the distances S Q and S Q
1 2
are much greater than d (which represents the distance between S and
1
S ) so that although S Q and S Q are not equal, the amplitudes of the
2 1 2
displacement produced by each wave are very nearly the same.
We next consider a point R [Fig. 10.9(b)] for which
S R – S R = –2.5l
2 1
The waves emanating from S will arrive exactly two and a half cycles
1
later than the waves from S [Fig. 10.10(b)]. Thus if the displacement
2 FIGURE 10.10 Locus
produced by S is given by
1 of points for which
y = a cos wt S P – S P is equal to
1 1 2
zero, –l, – 2l, – 3l.
then the displacement produced by S will be given by
2
y = a cos (wt + 5p) = – a cos wt
2 263
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
where we have used the fact that a path difference of 2.5l corresponds to
a phase difference of 5p. The two displacements are now out of phase
and the two displacements will cancel out to give zero intensity. This is
referred to as destructive interference.
To summarise: If we have two coherent sources S and S vibrating
1 2
in phase, then for an arbitrary point P whenever the path difference,
S P ~ S P = nl (n = 0, 1, 2, 3,...) (10.9)
1 2
we will have constructive interference and the resultant intensity will be
4I ; the sign ~ between S P and S P represents the difference between
0 1 2
S P and S P. On the other hand, if the point P is such that the path
1 2
difference,
S P ~ S P =
(n+1
) l (n = 0, 1, 2, 3, ...) (10.10)
1 2 2
we will have destructive interference and the resultant intensity will be
zero. Now, for any other arbitrary point G (Fig. 10.10) let the phase
difference between the two displacements be f. Thus, if the displacement
produced by S is given by
1
y = a cos wt
1
then, the displacement produced by S would be
2
y = a cos (wt + f)
2
and the resultant displacement will be given by
y = y + y
1 2
= a [cos wt + cos (wt +f)]
= 2 a cos (f/2) cos (wt + f/2)
The amplitude of the resultant displacement is 2a cos (f/2) and
therefore the intensity at that point will be
I = 4 I cos2 (f/2) (10.11)
0
If f = 0, – 2 p, – 4 p,… which corresponds to the condition given by
Eq. (10.9) we will have constructive interference leading to maximum
intensity. On the other hand, if f = – p, – 3p, – 5p … [which corresponds to
the condition given by Eq. (10.10)] we will have destructive interference
leading to zero intensity.
Now if the two sources are coherent (i.e., if the two needles are going
up and down regularly) then the phase difference f at any point will not
change with time and we will have a stable interference pattern; i.e., the
positions of maxima and minima will not change with time. However, if
the two needles do not maintain a constant phase difference, then the
interference pattern will also change with time and, if the phase difference
changes very rapidly with time, the positions of maxima and minima will
also vary rapidly with time and we will see a “time-averaged” intensity
distribution. When this happens, we will observe an average intensity
that will be given by
I = 2 I (10.12)
0
264
at all points.
ecnerefretni
evaw
no
stnemirepxe
knaT
elppiR
ecnerefretni-evaw/ycagel/noitalumis/ne/ude.odaroloc.tehp//:ptth
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
When the phase difference between the two vibrating sources changes
rapidly with time, we say that the two sources are incoherent and when
this happens the intensities just add up. This is indeed what happens
when two separate light sources illuminate a wall.
10.5 I L W Y ’
NTERFERENCE OF IGHT AVES AND OUNG S
E
XPERIMENT
We will now discuss interference using light waves. If
we use two sodium lamps illuminating two pinholes
(Fig. 10.11) we will not observe any interference fringes.
This is because of the fact that the light wave emitted
from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) undergoes
abrupt phase changes in times of the order of 10–10
seconds. Thus the light waves coming out from two
independent sources of light will not have any fixed
phase relationship and would be incoherent, when this
FIGURE 10.11 If two sodium
happens, as discussed in the previous section, the lamps illuminate two pinholes
intensities on the screen will add up. S and S , the intensities will add
1 2
The British physicist Thomas Young used an up and no interference fringes will
ingenious technique to “lock” the phases of the waves be observed on the screen.
emanating from S and S . He made two pinholes S
1 2 1
and S (very close to each other) on an opaque screen [Fig. 10.12(a)].
2
These were illuminated by another pinholes that was in turn, lit by a
bright source. Light waves spread out from S and fall on both S and S .
1 2
S and S then behave like two coherent sources because light waves
1 2
coming out from S and S are derived from the same original source
1 2
and any abrupt phase change in S will manifest in exactly similar phase
changes in the light coming out from S and S . Thus, the two sources S
1 2 1
and S will be locked in phase; i.e., they will be coherent like the two
2
vibrating needle in our water wave example [Fig. 10.8(a)].
The spherical waves emanating from S and S will produce
1 2
interference fringes on the screen GG¢, as shown in Fig. 10.12(b). The
positions of maximum and minimum intensities can be calculated by
using the analysis given in Section 10.4.
(a) (b)
FIGURE 10.12 Young’s arrangement to produce interference pattern. 265
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
Thomas Young
(1773 – 1829) English
physicist, physician and
Egyptologist. Young worked
on a wide variety of
scientific problems, ranging
from the structure of the eye
and the mechanism of
vision to the decipherment
of the Rosetta stone. He
revived the wave theory of
light and recognised that
interference phenomena
provide proof of the wave
properties of light.
FIGURE 10.13 Computer generated fringe pattern produced by two point
source S and S on the screen GG¢ (Fig. 10.12); correspond to d = 0.025
1 2
mm, D = 5 cm and l = 5 × 10–5 cm.) (Adopted from OPTICS by A. Ghatak,
Tata McGraw Hill Publishing Co. Ltd., New Delhi, 2000.)
266
)9281
–
3771(
GNUOY
SAMOHT
We will have constructive interference resulting in a bright
xd
region when = nl. That is,
D
nλD
x = x = ; n = 0, – 1, – 2, ... (10.13)
n d
On the other hand, we will have destructive
xd 1
interference resulting in a dark region when = (n+ ) l
D 2
that is
1 D
x = x = (n+ ) ; n 0,1,2 (10.14)
n 2 d
Thus dark and bright bands appear on the screen,
as shown in Fig. 10.13. Such bands are called fringes.
Equations (10.13) and (10.14) show that dark and
bright fringes are equally spaced.
10.6 D
IFFRACTION
If we look clearly at the shadow cast by an opaque object, close to the
region of geometrical shadow, there are alternate dark and bright regions
just like in interference. This happens due to the phenomenon of
diffraction. Diffraction is a general characteristic exhibited by all types of
waves, be it sound waves, light waves, water waves or matter waves. Since
the wavelength of light is much smaller than the dimensions of most
obstacles; we do not encounter diffraction effects of light in everyday
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
observations. However, the finite resolution of our eye or of optical
instruments such as telescopes or microscopes is limited due to the
phenomenon of diffraction. Indeed the colours that you see when a CD is
viewed is due to diffraction effects. We will now discuss the phenomenon
of diffraction.
10.6.1 The single slit
In the discussion of Young’s experiment, we stated that a single narrow
slit acts as a new source from which light spreads out. Even before Young,
early experimenters – including Newton – had noticed that light spreads
out from narrow holes and slits. It seems to turn around corners and
enter regions where we would expect a shadow. These effects, known as
diffraction, can only be properly understood using wave ideas. After all,
you are hardly surprised to hear sound
waves from someone talking around a corner!
When the double slit in Young’s
experiment is replaced by a single narrow
slit (illuminated by a monochromatic
source), a broad pattern with a central bright
region is seen. On both sides, there are
alternate dark and bright regions, the
intensity becoming weaker away from the
centre (Fig. 10.15). To understand this, go
to Fig. 10.14, which shows a parallel beam
of light falling normally on a single slit LN of
width a. The diffracted light goes on to meet
FIGURE 10.14 The geometry of path
a screen. The midpoint of the slit is M.
differences for diffraction by a single slit.
A straight line through M perpendicular
to the slit plane meets the screen at C. We want the
intensity at any point P on the screen. As before, straight
lines joining P to the different points L,M,N, etc., can be
treated as parallel, making an angle q with the
normal MC.
The basic idea is to divide the slit into much smaller
parts, and add their contributions at P with the proper
phase differences. We are treating different parts of the
wavefront at the slit as secondary sources. Because the
incoming wavefront is parallel to the plane of the slit, these
sources are in phase.
It is observed that the intensity has a central
maximum at q = 0 and other secondary maxima at q l
(n+1/2) l/a, which go on becoming weaker and weaker
with increasing n. The minima (zero intensity) are at q l
nl/a, n = ±1, ±2, ±3, ....
FIGURE 10.15 Intensity
The photograph and intensity pattern corresponding
distribution and photograph of
to it is shown in Fig. 10.15. fringes due to diffraction
There has been prolonged discussion about at single slit.
difference between intereference and diffraction among 267
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
scientists since the discovery of these phenomena. In this context, it is
interesting to note what Richard Feynman* has said in his famous
Feynman Lectures on Physics:
No one has ever been able to define the difference between
interference and diffraction satisfactorily. It is just a question
of usage, and there is no specific, important physical difference
between them. The best we can do is, roughly speaking, is to
say that when there are only a few sources, say two interfering
sources, then the result is usually called interference, but if there
is a large number of them, it seems that the word diffraction is
more often used.
In the double-slit experiment, we must note that the pattern on the
screen is actually a superposition of single-slit diffraction from each slit
or hole, and the double-slit interference pattern.
10.6.2 Seeing the single slit diffraction pattern
It is surprisingly easy to see the single-slit diffraction pattern for oneself.
The equipment needed can be found in most homes –– two razor blades
and one clear glass electric bulb preferably with a straight filament. One
has to hold the two blades so that the edges are parallel and have a
narrow slit in between. This is easily done with the thumb and forefingers
(Fig. 10.16).
Keep the slit parallel to the filament, right in front of the eye. Use
spectacles if you normally do. With slight adjustment of the width of
the slit and the parallelism of the edges, the pattern should be seen
with its bright and dark bands. Since the position of all the bands
(except the central one) depends on wavelength, they will show some
colours. Using a filter for red or blue will make the fringes clearer.
With both filters available, the wider fringes for red compared to blue
FIGURE 10.16
can be seen.
Holding two blades to
In this experiment, the filament plays the role of the first slit S in
form a single slit. A
Fig. 10.15. The lens of the eye focuses the pattern on the screen (the
bulb filament viewed
through this shows retina of the eye).
clear diffraction With some effort, one can cut a double slit in an aluminium foil with
bands. a blade. The bulb filament can be viewed as before to repeat Young’s
experiment. In daytime, there is another suitable bright source subtending
a small angle at the eye. This is the reflection of the Sun in any shiny
convex surface (e.g., a cycle bell). Do not try direct sunlight – it can damage
the eye and will not give fringes anyway as the Sun subtends an angle
of (1/2)°.
In interference and diffraction, light energy is redistributed. If it
reduces in one region, producing a dark fringe, it increases in another
region, producing a bright fringe. There is no gain or loss of energy,
which is consistent with the principle of conservation of energy.
* Richand Feynman was one of the recipients of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Physics
268 for his fundamental work in quantum electrodynamics.
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
10.7 P
OLARISATION
Consider holding a long string that is held horizontally, the other end of
which is assumed to be fixed. If we move the end of the string up and
down in a periodic manner, we will generate a wave propagating in the
+x direction (Fig. 10.17). Such a wave could be described by the following
equation
FIGURE 10.17 (a) The curves represent the displacement of a string at
t = 0 and at t = Dt, respectively when a sinusoidal wave is propagating
in the +x-direction. (b) The curve represents the time variation
of the displacement at x = 0 when a sinusoidal wave is propagating
in the +x-direction. At x = Dx, the time variation of the
displacement will be slightly displaced to the right.
y (x,t) = a sin (kx – wt) (10.15)
where a and w (= 2pn) represent the amplitude and the angular frequency
of the wave, respectively; further,
2p
l =
(10.16)
k
represents the wavelength associated with the wave. We had discussed
propagation of such waves in Chapter 14 of Class XI textbook. Since the
displacement (which is along the y direction) is at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave, we have what is known as a
transverse wave. Also, since the displacement is in the y direction, it is
often referred to as a y-polarised wave. Since each point on the string
moves on a straight line, the wave is also referred to as a linearly polarised 269
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
wave. Further, the string always remains confined to the x-y plane and
therefore it is also referred to as a plane polarised wave.
In a similar manner we can consider the vibration of the string in the
x-z plane generating a z-polarised wave whose displacement will be given
by
z (x,t) = a sin (kx – wt) (10.17)
It should be mentioned that the linearly polarised waves [described
by Eqs. (10.15) and (10.17)] are all transverse waves; i.e., the
displacement of each point of the string is always at right angles to the
direction of propagation of the wave. Finally, if the plane of vibration of
the string is changed randomly in very short intervals of time, then we
have what is known as an unpolarised wave. Thus, for an unpolarised
wave the displacement will be randomly changing with time though it
will always be perpendicular to the direction of propagation.
Light waves are transverse in nature; i.e., the electric field associated
with a propagating light wave is always at right angles to the direction of
propagation of the wave. This can be easily demonstrated using a simple
polaroid. You must have seen thin plastic like sheets, which are called
polaroids. A polaroid consists of long chain molecules aligned in a
particular direction. The electric vectors (associated with the propagating
light wave) along the direction of the aligned molecules get absorbed.
Thus, if an unpolarised light wave is incident on such a polaroid then
the light wave will get linearly polarised with the electric vector oscillating
along a direction perpendicular to the aligned molecules; this direction
is known as the pass-axis of the polaroid.
Thus, if the light from an ordinary source (like a sodium lamp) passes
through a polaroid sheet P it is observed that its intensity is reduced by
1,
half. Rotating P has no effect on the transmitted beam and transmitted
1
intensity remains constant. Now, let an identical piece of polaroid P be
2
placed before P . As expected, the light from the lamp is reduced in
1
intensity on passing through P alone. But now rotating P has a dramatic
2 1
effect on the light coming from P . In one position, the intensity transmitted
2
by P followed by P is nearly zero. When turned by 90° from this position,
2 1
P transmits nearly the full intensity emerging from P (Fig. 10.18).
1 2
The experiment at figure 10.18 can be easily understood by assuming
that light passing through the polaroid P gets polarised along the pass-
2
axis of P . If the pass-axis of P makes an angle q with the pass-axis of
2 2
P , then when the polarised beam passes through the polaroid P , the
1 2
component E cos q (along the pass-axis of P ) will pass through P .
2 2
Thus, as we rotate the polaroid P (or P ), the intensity will vary as:
1 2
I = I cos2q (10.18)
0
where I is the intensity of the polarized light after passing through
0
P .This is known as Malus’ law. The above discussion shows that the
1
270
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
FIGURE 10.18 (a) Passage of light through two polaroids P and P . The
2 1
transmitted fraction falls from 1 to 0 as the angle between them varies
from 0° to 90°. Notice that the light seen through a single polaroid
P does not vary with angle. (b) Behaviour of the electric vector
1
when light passes through two polaroids. The transmitted
polarisation is the component parallel to the polaroid axis.
The double arrows show the oscillations of the electric vector.
intensity coming out of a single polaroid is half of the incident intensity.
By putting a second polaroid, the intensity can be further controlled
from 50% to zero of the incident intensity by adjusting the angle between
the pass-axes of two polaroids.
Polaroids can be used to control the intensity, in sunglasses,
windowpanes, etc. Polaroids are also used in photographic cameras and
3D movie cameras.
271
EXAMPLE
10.2
Example 10.2 Discuss the intensity of transmitted light when a
polaroid sheet is rotated between two crossed polaroids?
Solution Let I be the intensity of polarised light after passing through
0
the first polariser P . Then the intensity of light after passing through
1
second polariser P will be
2
I = I cos2q ,
0
where q is the angle between pass axes of P and P . Since P and P
1 2 1 3
are crossed the angle between the pass axes of P and P will be
2 3
(p/2–q). Hence the intensity of light emerging from P will be
3
(cid:230) p (cid:246)
I = I cos2θcos2(cid:231) –θ(cid:247)
0 Ł 2 ł
= I cos2q sin2q =(I /4) sin22q
0 0
Therefore, the transmitted intensity will be maximum when q = p/4.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
SUMMARY
1. Huygens’ principle tells us that each point on a wavefront is a source
of secondary waves, which add up to give the wavefront at a later time.
2. Huygens’ construction tells us that the new wavefront is the forward
envelope of the secondary waves. When the speed of light is
independent of direction, the secondary waves are spherical. The rays
are then perpendicular to both the wavefronts and the time of travel
is the same measured along any ray. This principle leads to the well
known laws of reflection and refraction.
3. The principle of superposition of waves applies whenever two or more
sources of light illuminate the same point. When we consider the
intensity of light due to these sources at the given point, there is an
interference term in addition to the sum of the individual intensities.
But this term is important only if it has a non-zero average, which
occurs only if the sources have the same frequency and a stable phase
difference.
4. Young’s double slit of separation d gives equally spaced interference
fringes.
5. A single slit of width a gives a diffraction pattern with a central
l 2l
maximum. The intensity falls to zero at angles of – –, , etc.,
a a
with successively weaker secondary maxima in between.
6. Natural light, e.g., from the sun is unpolarised. This means the electric
vector takes all possible directions in the transverse plane, rapidly
and randomly, during a measurement. A polaroid transmits only one
component (parallel to a special axis). The resulting light is called
linearly polarised or plane polarised. When this kind of light is viewed
through a second polaroid whose axis turns through 2p, two maxima
and minima of intensity are seen.
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Waves from a point source spread out in all directions, while light was
seen to travel along narrow rays. It required the insight and experiment
of Huygens, Young and Fresnel to understand how a wave theory could
explain all aspects of the behaviour of light.
2. The crucial new feature of waves is interference of amplitudes from different
sources which can be both constructive and destructive, as shown in
Young’s experiment.
3. Diffraction phenomena define the limits of ray optics. The limit of the
ability of microscopes and telescopes to distinguish very close objects is
set by the wavelength of light.
4. Most interference and diffraction effects exist even for longitudinal waves
like sound in air. But polarisation phenomena are special to transverse
waves like light waves.
272
Rationalised 2023-24Wave Optics
EXERCISES
10.1 Monochromatic light of wavelength 589 nm is incident from air on a
water surface. What are the wavelength, frequency and speed of
(a) reflected, and (b) refracted light? Refractive index of water is
1.33.
10.2 What is the shape of the wavefront in each of the following cases:
(a) Light diverging from a point source.
(b) Light emerging out of a convex lens when a point source is placed
at its focus.
(c) The portion of the wavefront of light from a distant star intercepted
by the Earth.
10.3 (a) The refractive index of glass is 1.5. What is the speed of light in
glass? (Speed of light in vacuum is 3.0 × 108 m s–1)
(b) Is the speed of light in glass independent of the colour of light? If
not, which of the two colours red and violet travels slower in a
glass prism?
10.4 In a Young’s double-slit experiment, the slits are separated by
0.28 mm and the screen is placed 1.4 m away. The distance between
the central bright fringe and the fourth bright fringe is measured
to be 1.2 cm. Determine the wavelength of light used in the
experiment.
10.5 In Young’s double-slit experiment using monochromatic light of
wavelength l, the intensity of light at a point on the screen where
path difference is l, is K units. What is the intensity of light at a
point where path difference is l/3?
10.6 A beam of light consisting of two wavelengths, 650 nm and 520 nm,
is used to obtain interference fringes in a Young’s double-slit
experiment.
(a) Find the distance of the third bright fringe on the screen from
the central maximum for wavelength 650 nm.
(b) What is the least distance from the central maximum where the
bright fringes due to both the wavelengths coincide?
273
Rationalised 2023-24