Chapter Fourteen
SEMICONDUCTOR
ELECTRONICS:
MATERIALS, DEVICES
AND SIMPLE CIRCUITS
14.1 I
NTRODUCTION
Devices in which a controlled flow of electrons can be obtained are the
basic building blocks of all the electronic circuits. Before the discovery of
transistor in 1948, such devices were mostly vacuum tubes (also called
valves) like the vacuum diode which has two electrodes, viz., anode (often
called plate) and cathode; triode which has three electrodes – cathode,
plate and grid; tetrode and pentode (respectively with 4 and 5 electrodes).
In a vacuum tube, the electrons are supplied by a heated cathode and
the controlled flow of these electrons in vacuum is obtained by varying
the voltage between its different electrodes. Vacuum is required in the
inter-electrode space; otherwise the moving electrons may lose their
energy on collision with the air molecules in their path. In these devices
the electrons can flow only from the cathode to the anode (i.e., only in one
direction). Therefore, such devices are generally referred to as valves.
These vacuum tube devices are bulky, consume high power, operate
generally at high voltages (~100 V) and have limited life and low reliability.
The seed of the development of modern solid-state semiconductor
electronics goes back to 1930’s when it was realised that some solid-
state semiconductors and their junctions offer the possibility of controlling
the number and the direction of flow of charge carriers through them.
Simple excitations like light, heat or small applied voltage can change
the number of mobile charges in a semiconductor. Note that the supply
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
and flow of charge carriers in the semiconductor devices are within the
solid itself, while in the earlier vacuum tubes/valves, the mobile electrons
were obtained from a heated cathode and they were made to flow in an
evacuated space or vacuum. No external heating or large evacuated space
is required by the semiconductor devices. They are small in size, consume
low power, operate at low voltages and have long life and high reliability.
Even the Cathode Ray Tubes (CRT) used in television and computer
monitors which work on the principle of vacuum tubes are being replaced
by Liquid Crystal Display (LCD) monitors with supporting solid state
electronics. Much before the full implications of the semiconductor devices
was formally understood, a naturally occurring crystal of galena (Lead
sulphide, PbS) with a metal point contact attached to it was used as
detector of radio waves.
In the following sections, we will introduce the basic concepts of
semiconductor physics and discuss some semiconductor devices like
junction diodes (a 2-electrode device) and bipolar junction transistor (a
3-electrode device). A few circuits illustrating their applications will also
be described.
14.2 C M , C
LASSIFICATION OF ETALS ONDUCTORS AND
S
EMICONDUCTORS
On the basis of conductivity
On the basis of the relative values of electrical conductivity (s) or resistivity
(r = 1/s), the solids are broadly classified as:
(i) Metals: They possess very low resistivity (or high conductivity).
r ~ 10–2 – 10–8 W m
s ~ 102 – 108 S m–1
(ii) Semiconductors: They have resistivity or conductivity intermediate
to metals and insulators.
r ~ 10–5 – 106 W m
s ~ 105 – 10–6 S m–1
(iii)Insulators: They have high resistivity (or low conductivity).
r ~ 1011 – 1019 W m
s ~ 10–11 – 10–19 S m–1
The values of r and s given above are indicative of magnitude and
could well go outside the ranges as well. Relative values of the resistivity
are not the only criteria for distinguishing metals, insulators and
semiconductors from each other. There are some other differences, which
will become clear as we go along in this chapter.
Our interest in this chapter is in the study of semiconductors which
could be:
(i) Elemental semiconductors: Si and Ge
(ii) Compound semiconductors: Examples are:
• Inorganic: CdS, GaAs, CdSe, InP, etc.
• Organic: anthracene, doped pthalocyanines, etc.
• Organic polymers: polypyrrole, polyaniline, polythiophene, etc.
Most of the currently available semiconductor devices are based on
324
elemental semiconductors Si or Ge and compound inorganic
semiconductors. However, after 1990, a few semiconductor devices using
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
organic semiconductors and semiconducting polymers have been
developed signalling the birth of a futuristic technology of polymer-
electronics and molecular-electronics. In this chapter, we will restrict
ourselves to the study of inorganic semiconductors, particularly
elemental semiconductors Si and Ge. The general concepts introduced
here for discussing the elemental semiconductors, by-and-large, apply
to most of the compound semiconductors as well.
On the basis of energy bands
According to the Bohr atomic model, in an isolated atom the energy of
any of its electrons is decided by the orbit in which it revolves. But when
the atoms come together to form a solid they are close to each other. So
the outer orbits of electrons from neighbouring atoms would come very
close or could even overlap. This would make the nature of electron motion
in a solid very different from that in an isolated atom.
Inside the crystal each electron has a unique position and no two
electrons see exactly the same pattern of surrounding charges. Because
of this, each electron will have a different energy level. These different
energy levels with continuous energy variation form what are called
energy bands. The energy band which includes the energy levels of the
valence electrons is called the valence band. The energy band above the
valence band is called the conduction band. With no external energy, all
the valence electrons will reside in the valence band. If the lowest level in
the conduction band happens to be lower than the highest level of the
valence band, the electrons from the valence band can easily move into
the conduction band. Normally the conduction band is empty. But when
it overlaps on the valence band electrons can move freely into it. This is
the case with metallic conductors.
If there is some gap between the conduction band and the valence
band, electrons in the valence band all remain bound and no free electrons
are available in the conduction band. This makes the material an
insulator. But some of the electrons from the valence band may gain
external energy to cross the gap between the conduction band and the
valence band. Then these electrons will move into the conduction band.
At the same time they will create vacant energy levels in the valence band
where other valence electrons can move. Thus the process creates the
possibility of conduction due to electrons in conduction band as well as
due to vacancies in the valence band.
Let us consider what happens in the case of Si or Ge crystal containing
N atoms. For Si, the outermost orbit is the third orbit (n = 3), while for Ge
it is the fourth orbit (n = 4). The number of electrons in the outermost
orbit is 4 (2s and 2p electrons). Hence, the total number of outer electrons
in the crystal is 4N. The maximum possible number of electrons in the
outer orbit is 8 (2s + 6p electrons). So, for the 4N valence electrons there
are 8N available energy states. These 8N discrete energy levels can either
form a continuous band or they may be grouped in different bands
depending upon the distance between the atoms in the crystal (see box
on Band Theory of Solids).
At the distance between the atoms in the crystal lattices of Si and Ge,
the energy band of these 8N states is split apart into two which are
separated by an energy gap E (Fig. 14.1). The lower band which is
g
completely occupied by the 4N valence electrons at temperature of absolute 325
zero is the valence band. The other band consisting of 4N energy states,
called the conduction band, is completely empty at absolute zero.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
The lowest energy level in the
conduction band is shown as E and
C
highest energy level in the valence band
is shown as E . Above E and below E
V C V
there are a large number of closely spaced
energy levels, as shown in Fig. 14.1.
The gap between the top of the valence
band and bottom of the conduction band
is called the energy band gap (Energy gap
E ). It may be large, small, or zero,
g
depending upon the material. These
different situations, are depicted in Fig.
14.2 and discussed below:
Case I: This refers to a situation, as
shown in Fig. 14.2(a). One can have a
metal either when the conduction band
FIGURE 14.1 The energy band positions in a is partially filled and the balanced band
semiconductor at 0 K. The upper band, called the is partially empty or when the conduction
conduction band, consists of infinitely large number
and valance bands overlap. When there
of closely spaced energy states. The lower band,
is overlap electrons from valence band can
called the valence band, consists of closely spaced
easily move into the conduction band.
completely filled energy states.
This situation makes a large number of
electrons available for electrical conduction. When the valence band is
partially empty, electrons from its lower level can move to higher level
making conduction possible. Therefore, the resistance of such materials
is low or the conductivity is high.
FIGURE 14.2 Difference between energy bands of (a) metals,
326
(b) insulators and (c) semiconductors.
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
Case II: In this case, as shown in Fig. 14.2(b), a large band gap E exists
g
(E > 3 eV). There are no electrons in the conduction band, and therefore
g
no electrical conduction is possible. Note that the energy gap is so large
that electrons cannot be excited from the valence band to the conduction
band by thermal excitation. This is the case of insulators.
Case III: This situation is shown in Fig. 14.2(c). Here a finite but small
band gap (E < 3 eV) exists. Because of the small band gap, at room
g
temperature some electrons from valence band can acquire enough
energy to cross the energy gap and enter the conduction band. These
electrons (though small in numbers) can move in the conduction band.
Hence, the resistance of semiconductors is not as high as that of the
insulators.
In this section we have made a broad classification of metals,
conductors and semiconductors. In the section which follows you will
learn the conduction process in semiconductors.
14.3 I S
NTRINSIC EMICONDUCTOR
We shall take the most common case of Ge and Si whose
lattice structure is shown in Fig. 14.3. These structures
are called the diamond-like structures. Each atom is
surrounded by four nearest neighbours. We know that
Si and Ge have four valence electrons. In its crystalline
structure, every Si or Ge atom tends to share one of its
four valence electrons with each of its four nearest
neighbour atoms, and also to take share of one electron
from each such neighbour. These shared electron pairs
are referred to as forming a covalent bond or simply a
valence bond. The two shared electrons can be assumed
to shuttle back-and-forth between the associated atoms
holding them together strongly. Figure 14.4 schematically
shows the 2-dimensional representation of Si or Ge
FIGURE 14.3 Three-dimensional dia-
structure shown in Fig. 14.3 which overemphasises the mond-like crystal structure for Carbon,
covalent bond. It shows an idealised picture in which no Silicon or Germanium with
bonds are broken (all bonds are intact). Such a situation respective lattice spacing a equal
arises at low temperatures. As the temperature increases, to 3.56, 5.43 and 5.66 Å.
more thermal energy becomes available to these electrons and some of
these electrons may break–away (becoming free electrons contributing to
conduction). The thermal energy effectively ionises only a few atoms in the
crystalline lattice and creates a vacancy in the bond as shown in Fig. 14.5(a).
The neighbourhood, from which the free electron (with charge –q) has come
out leaves a vacancy with an effective charge (+q). This vacancy with the
effective positive electronic charge is called a hole. The hole behaves as an
apparent free particle with effective positive charge.
In intrinsic semiconductors, the number of free electrons, n is equal to
e
the number of holes, n . That is
h
n = n = n (14.1)
e h i
where n is called intrinsic carrier concentration.
i
Semiconductors posses the unique property in which, apart from
electrons, the holes also move. Suppose there is a hole at site 1 as shown 327
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
in Fig. 14.5(a). The movement of holes can be
visualised as shown in Fig. 14.5(b). An electron
from the covalent bond at site 2 may jump to
the vacant site 1 (hole). Thus, after such a jump,
the hole is at site 2 and the site 1 has now an
electron. Therefore, apparently, the hole has
moved from site 1 to site 2. Note that the electron
originally set free [Fig. 14.5(a)] is not involved
in this process of hole motion. The free electron
moves completely independently as conduction
electron and gives rise to an electron current, I
e
under an applied electric field. Remember that
the motion of hole is only a convenient way of
FIGURE 14.4 Schematic two-dimensional
describing the actual motion of bound electrons,
representation of Si or Ge structure showing
whenever there is an empty bond anywhere in
covalent bonds at low temperature
the crystal. Under the action of an electric field,
(all bonds intact). +4 symbol
these holes move towards negative potential
indicates inner cores of Si or Ge.
giving the hole current, I . The total current, I is
h
thus the sum of the electron current I and the
e
hole current I :
h
I = I + I (14.2)
e h
It may be noted that apart from the process of generation of conduction
electrons and holes, a simultaneous process of recombination occurs in
which the electrons recombine with the holes. At equilibrium, the rate of
generation is equal to the rate of recombination of charge carriers. The
recombination occurs due to an electron colliding with a hole.
(a) (b)
FIGURE 14.5 (a) Schematic model of generation of hole at site 1 and conduction electron
due to thermal energy at moderate temperatures. (b) Simplified representation of
possible thermal motion of a hole. The electron from the lower left hand covalent bond
(site 2) goes to the earlier hole site1, leaving a hole at its site indicating an
328 apparent movement of the hole from site 1 to site 2.
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
329
EXAMPLE
14.1
An intrinsic semiconductor
will behave like an insulator at
T = 0 K as shown in Fig. 14.6(a).
It is the thermal energy at
higher temperatures (T > 0K),
which excites some electrons
from the valence band to the
conduction band. These
thermally excited electrons at
T > 0 K, partially occupy the
conduction band. Therefore,
the energy-band diagram of an
intrinsic semiconductor will be
as shown in Fig. 14.6(b). Here, FIGURE 14.6 (a) An intrinsic semiconductor at T = 0 K
some electrons are shown in behaves like insulator. (b) At T > 0 K, four thermally generated
the conduction band. These electron-hole pairs. The filled circles ( ) represent electrons
have come from the valence and empty circles ( ) represent holes.
band leaving equal number of
holes there.
Example 14.1 C, Si and Ge have same lattice structure. Why is C
insulator while Si and Ge intrinsic semiconductors?
Solution The 4 bonding electrons of C, Si or Ge lie, respectively, in
the second, third and fourth orbit. Hence, energy required to take
out an electron from these atoms (i.e., ionisation energy E ) will be
g
least for Ge, followed by Si and highest for C. Hence, number of free
electrons for conduction in Ge and Si are significant but negligibly
small for C.
14.4 E S
XTRINSIC EMICONDUCTOR
The conductivity of an intrinsic semiconductor depends on its
temperature, but at room temperature its conductivity is very low. As
such, no important electronic devices can be developed using these
semiconductors. Hence there is a necessity of improving their
conductivity. This can be done by making use of impurities.
When a small amount, say, a few parts per million (ppm), of a suitable
impurity is added to the pure semiconductor, the conductivity of the
semiconductor is increased manifold. Such materials are known as
extrinsic semiconductors or impurity semiconductors. The deliberate
addition of a desirable impurity is called doping and the impurity atoms
are called dopants. Such a material is also called a doped semiconductor.
The dopant has to be such that it does not distort the original pure
semiconductor lattice. It occupies only a very few of the original
semiconductor atom sites in the crystal. A necessary condition to attain
this is that the sizes of the dopant and the semiconductor atoms should
be nearly the same.
There are two types of dopants used in doping the tetravalent Si
or Ge:
(i) Pentavalent (valency 5); like Arsenic (As), Antimony (Sb), Phosphorous
(P), etc.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
(ii) Trivalent (valency 3); like Indium (In),
Boron (B), Aluminium (Al), etc.
We shall now discuss how the doping
changes the number of charge carriers (and
hence the conductivity) of semiconductors.
Si or Ge belongs to the fourth group in the
Periodic table and, therefore, we choose the
dopant element from nearby fifth or third
group, expecting and taking care that the
size of the dopant atom is nearly the same as
that of Si or Ge. Interestingly, the pentavalent
and trivalent dopants in Si or Ge give two
entirely different types of semiconductors as
discussed below.
(i) n-type semiconductor
Suppose we dope Si or Ge with a pentavalent
element as shown in Fig. 14.7. When an atom
of +5 valency element occupies the position
of an atom in the crystal lattice of Si, four of
its electrons bond with the four silicon
neighbours while the fifth remains very
weakly bound to its parent atom. This is
because the four electrons participating in
FIGURE 14.7 (a) Pentavalent donor atom (As, Sb, bonding are seen as part of the effective core
P, etc.) doped for tetravalent Si or Ge giving n- of the atom by the fifth electron. As a result
type semiconductor, and (b) Commonly used the ionisation energy required to set this
schematic representation of n-type material
electron free is very small and even at room
which shows only the fixed cores of the
temperature it will be free to move in the
substituent donors with one additional effective
lattice of the semiconductor. For example, the
positive charge and its associated extra electron.
energy required is ~ 0.01 eV for germanium,
and 0.05 eV for silicon, to separate this
electron from its atom. This is in contrast to the energy required to jump
the forbidden band (about 0.72 eV for germanium and about 1.1 eV for
silicon) at room temperature in the intrinsic semiconductor. Thus, the
pentavalent dopant is donating one extra electron for conduction and
hence is known as donor impurity. The number of electrons made
available for conduction by dopant atoms depends strongly upon the
doping level and is independent of any increase in ambient temperature.
On the other hand, the number of free electrons (with an equal number
of holes) generated by Si atoms, increases weakly with temperature.
In a doped semiconductor the total number of conduction electrons
n is due to the electrons contributed by donors and those generated
e
intrinsically, while the total number of holes n is only due to the holes
h
from the intrinsic source. But the rate of recombination of holes would
increase due to the increase in the number of electrons. As a result, the
number of holes would get reduced further.
Thus, with proper level of doping the number of conduction electrons
330
can be made much larger than the number of holes. Hence in an extrinsic
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
semiconductor doped with pentavalent impurity, electrons
become the majority carriers and holes the minority carriers.
These semiconductors are, therefore, known as n-type
semiconductors. For n-type semiconductors, we have,
n >> n (14.3)
e h
(ii) p-type semiconductor
This is obtained when Si or Ge is doped with a trivalent impurity
like Al, B, In, etc. The dopant has one valence electron less than
Si or Ge and, therefore, this atom can form covalent bonds with
neighbouring three Si atoms but does not have any electron to
offer to the fourth Si atom. So the bond between the fourth
neighbour and the trivalent atom has a vacancy or hole as
shown in Fig. 14.8. Since the neighbouring Si atom in the lattice
wants an electron in place of a hole, an electron in the outer
orbit of an atom in the neighbourhood may jump to fill this
vacancy, leaving a vacancy or hole at its own site. Thus the hole
is available for conduction. Note that the trivalent foreign atom
becomes effectively negatively charged when it shares fourth
electron with neighbouring Si atom. Therefore, the dopant atom
of p-type material can be treated as core of one negative charge
along with its associated hole as shown in Fig. 14.8(b). It is
obvious that one acceptor atom gives one hole. These holes are
in addition to the intrinsically generated holes while the source
of conduction electrons is only intrinsic generation. Thus, for
such a material, the holes are the majority carriers and electrons
are minority carriers. Therefore, extrinsic semiconductors doped FIGURE 14.8 (a) Trivalent
acceptor atom (In, Al, B etc.)
with trivalent impurity are called p-type semiconductors. For
doped in tetravalent Si or Ge
p-type semiconductors, the recombination process will reduce
lattice giving p-type semicon-
the number (n)of intrinsically generated electrons to n .
i e ductor. (b) Commonly used
We have, for p-type semiconductors
schematic representation of
n >> n (14.4) p-type material which shows
h e
Note that the crystal maintains an overall charge neutrality only the fixed core of the
substituent acceptor with
as the charge of additional charge carriers is just equal and
one effective additional
opposite to that of the ionised cores in the lattice.
negative charge and its
In extrinsic semiconductors, because of the abundance of
associated hole.
majority current carriers, the minority carriers produced
thermally have more chance of meeting majority carriers and
thus getting destroyed. Hence, the dopant, by adding a large number of
current carriers of one type, which become the majority carriers, indirectly
helps to reduce the intrinsic concentration of minority carriers.
The semiconductor’s energy band structure is affected by doping. In
the case of extrinsic semiconductors, additional energy states due to donor
impurities (E ) and acceptor impurities (E ) also exist. In the energy band
D A
diagram of n-type Si semiconductor, the donor energy level E is slightly
D
below the bottom E of the conduction band and electrons from this level
C
move into the conduction band with very small supply of energy. At room
temperature, most of the donor atoms get ionised but very few (~1012)
atoms of Si get ionised. So the conduction band will have most electrons
331
coming from the donor impurities, as shown in Fig. 14.9(a). Similarly,
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
332
2.41
ELPMAXE
for p-type semiconductor, the acceptor energy level E is slightly above
A
the top E of the valence band as shown in Fig. 14.9(b). With very small
V
supply of energy an electron from the valence band can jump to the level
E and ionise the acceptor negatively. (Alternately, we can also say that
A
with very small supply of energy the hole from level E sinks down into
A
the valence band. Electrons rise up and holes fall down when they gain
external energy.) At room temperature, most of the acceptor atoms get
ionised leaving holes in the valence band. Thus at room temperature the
density of holes in the valence band is predominantly due to impurity in
the extrinsic semiconductor. The electron and hole concentration in a
semiconductor in thermal equilibrium is given by
n n = n2 (14.5)
e h i
Though the above description is grossly approximate and
hypothetical, it helps in understanding the difference between metals,
insulators and semiconductors (extrinsic and intrinsic) in a simple
manner. The difference in the resistivity of C, Si and Ge depends upon
the energy gap between their conduction and valence bands. For C
(diamond), Si and Ge, the energy gaps are 5.4 eV, 1.1 eV and 0.7 eV,
respectively. Sn also is a group IV element but it is a metal because the
energy gap in its case is 0 eV.
FIGURE 14.9 Energy bands of (a) n-type semiconductor at T > 0K, (b) p-type
semiconductor at T > 0K.
Example 14.2 Suppose a pure Si crystal has 5 × 1028 atoms m–3. It is
doped by 1 ppm concentration of pentavalent As. Calculate the
number of electrons and holes. Given that n =1.5 × 1016 m–3.
i
Solution Note that thermally generated electrons (n ~1016 m–3) are
i
negligibly small as compared to those produced by doping.
Therefore, n »»»»» N .
e D
Since n n = n2, The number of holes
e h i
n = (2.25 × 1032)/(5 ×1022)
h
~ 4.5 × 109 m–3
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
14.5 p-n J
UNCTION
A p-n junction is the basic building block of many semiconductor devices
like diodes, transistor, etc. A clear understanding of the junction behaviour
is important to analyse the working of other semiconductor devices.
We will now try to understand how a junction is formed and how the
junction behaves under the influence of external applied voltage (also
called bias).
14.5.1 p-n junction formation
Consider a thin p-type silicon (p-Si) semiconductor wafer. By adding
precisely a small quantity of pentavelent impurity, part of the p-Si wafer
can be converted into n-Si. There are several processes by which a
semiconductor can be formed. The wafer now contains p-region and
n-region and a metallurgical junction between p-, and n- region.
Two important processes occur during the formation of a p-n junction:
diffusion and drift. We know that in an n-type semiconductor, the
concentration of electrons (number of electrons per unit volume) is more
compared to the concentration of holes. Similarly, in a p-type
semiconductor, the concentration of holes is more than the concentration
of electrons. During the formation of p-n junction, and due to the
concentration gradient across p-, and n- sides, holes diffuse from p-side
to n-side (p fi n) and electrons diffuse from n-side to p-side (n fi p). This
motion of charge carries gives rise to diffusion current across the junction.
When an electron diffuses from n fi p, it leaves behind an ionised
donor on n-side. This ionised donor (positive charge) is immobile as it is
bonded to the surrounding atoms. As the electrons continue to diffuse
from n fi p, a layer of positive charge (or positive space-charge region) on
n-side of the junction is developed.
Similarly, when a hole diffuses from p fi n due to the concentration
gradient, it leaves behind an ionised acceptor (negative charge) which is
immobile. As the holes continue to diffuse, a layer of negative charge (or
negative space-charge region) on the p-side of the junction is developed.
This space-charge region on either side of the junction together is known
as depletion region as the electrons and holes taking
part in the initial movement across the junction depleted
the region of its free charges (Fig. 14.10). The thickness
of depletion region is of the order of one-tenth of a
micrometre. Due to the positive space-charge region on
n-side of the junction and negative space charge region
on p-side of the junction, an electric field directed from
positive charge towards negative charge develops. Due
to this field, an electron on p-side of the junction moves
to n-side and a hole on n-side of the junction moves to p- FIGURE 14.10 p-n junction
side. The motion of charge carriers due to the electric field formation process.
is called drift. Thus a drift current, which is opposite in
direction to the diffusion current (Fig. 14.10) starts. 333
http://hyperphysics.phy-astr.gsu.edu/hbase/solids/pnjun.html Formation
and
working
of
p-n
junction
diode
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
334
3.41
ELPMAXE
Initially, diffusion current is large and drift current is small.
As the diffusion process continues, the space-charge regions
on either side of the junction extend, thus increasing the electric
field strength and hence drift current. This process continues
until the diffusion current equals the drift current. Thus a p-n
junction is formed. In a p-n junction under equilibrium there
is no net current.
The loss of electrons from the n-region and the gain of
electron by the p-region causes a difference of potential across
the junction of the two regions. The polarity of this potential is
such as to oppose further flow of carriers so that a condition of
equilibrium exists. Figure 14.11 shows the p-n junction at
equilibrium and the potential across the junction. The
n-material has lost electrons, and p material has acquired
electrons. The n material is thus positive relative to the p
FIGURE 14.11 (a) Diode under material. Since this potential tends to prevent the movement of
equilibrium (V = 0), (b) Barrier electron from the n region into the p region, it is often called a
potential under no bias. barrier potential.
Example 14.3 Can we take one slab of p-type semiconductor and
physically join it to another n-type semiconductor to get p-n junction?
Solution No! Any slab, howsoever flat, will have roughness much
larger than the inter-atomic crystal spacing (~2 to 3 Å) and hence
continuous contact at the atomic level will not be possible. The junction
will behave as a discontinuity for the flowing charge carriers.
14.6 S D
EMICONDUCTOR IODE
A semiconductor diode [Fig. 14.12(a)] is basically a p-n
junction with metallic contacts provided at the ends for
the application of an external voltage. It is a two terminal
device. A p-n junction diode is symbolically represented
as shown in Fig. 14.12(b).
The direction of arrow indicates the conventional
direction of current (when the diode is under forward
p n bias). The equilibrium barrier potential can be altered
by applying an external voltage V across the diode. The
FIGURE 14.12 (a) Semiconductor diode, situation of p-n junction diode under equilibrium
(b) Symbol for p-n junction diode. (without bias) is shown in Fig. 14.11(a) and (b).
14.6.1 p-n junction diode under forward bias
When an external voltage V is applied across a semiconductor diode such
that p-side is connected to the positive terminal of the battery and n-side
to the negative terminal [Fig. 14.13(a)], it is said to be forward biased.
The applied voltage mostly drops across the depletion region and the
voltage drop across the p-side and n-side of the junction is negligible.
(This is because the resistance of the depletion region – a region where
there are no charges – is very high compared to the resistance of n-side
and p-side.) The direction of the applied voltage (V) is opposite to the
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
built-in potential V . As a result, the depletion layer width
0
decreases and the barrier height is reduced [Fig. 14.13(b)]. The
effective barrier height under forward bias is (V – V).
0
If the applied voltage is small, the barrier potential will be
reduced only slightly below the equilibrium value, and only a
small number of carriers in the material—those that happen to
be in the uppermost energy levels—will possess enough energy
to cross the junction. So the current will be small. If we increase
the applied voltage significantly, the barrier height will be reduced
and more number of carriers will have the required energy. Thus
the current increases.
Due to the applied voltage, electrons from n-side cross the
depletion region and reach p-side (where they are minority
carries). Similarly, holes from p-side cross the junction and reach
the n-side (where they are minority carries). This process under
forward bias is known as minority carrier injection. At the
FIGURE 14.13 (a) p-n
junction boundary, on each side, the minority carrier
junction diode under forward
concentration increases significantly compared to the locations
bias, (b) Barrier potential
far from the junction.
(1) without battery, (2) Low
Due to this concentration gradient, the injected electrons on
battery voltage, and (3) High
p-side diffuse from the junction edge of p-side to the other end
voltage battery.
of p-side. Likewise, the injected holes on n-side diffuse from the
junction edge of n-side to the other end of n-side
(Fig. 14.14). This motion of charged carriers on either side
gives rise to current. The total diode forward current is sum
of hole diffusion current and conventional current due to
electron diffusion. The magnitude of this current is usually
in mA.
14.6.2 p-n junction diode under reverse bias
When an external voltage (V) is applied across the diode such FIGURE 14.14 Forward bias
that n-side is positive and p-side is negative, it is said to be minority carrier injection.
reverse biased [Fig.14.15(a)]. The applied voltage mostly
drops across the depletion region. The direction of applied voltage is same
as the direction of barrier potential. As a result, the barrier height increases
and the depletion region widens due to the change in the electric field.
The effective barrier height under reverse bias is (V + V), [Fig. 14.15(b)].
0
This suppresses the flow of electrons from n fi p and holes from p fi n.
Thus, diffusion current, decreases enormously compared to the diode
under forward bias.
The electric field direction of the junction is such that if electrons on
p-side or holes on n-side in their random motion come close to the
junction, they will be swept to its majority zone. This drift of carriers
gives rise to current. The drift current is of the order of a few mA. This is
quite low because it is due to the motion of carriers from their minority
side to their majority side across the junction. The drift current is also
there under forward bias but it is negligible (mA) when compared with
current due to injected carriers which is usually in mA.
The diode reverse current is not very much dependent on the applied
voltage. Even a small voltage is sufficient to sweep the minority carriers
335
from one side of the junction to the other side of the junction. The current
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
is not limited by the magnitude of the applied voltage but is
limited due to the concentration of the minority carrier on either
side of the junction.
The current under reverse bias is essentially voltage
independent upto a critical reverse bias voltage, known as
breakdown voltage (V ). When V = V , the diode reverse current
br br
increases sharply. Even a slight increase in the bias voltage causes
large change in the current. If the reverse current is not limited by
an external circuit below the rated value (specified by the
manufacturer) the p-n junction will get destroyed. Once it exceeds
the rated value, the diode gets destroyed due to overheating. This
can happen even for the diode under forward bias, if the forward
current exceeds the rated value.
The circuit arrangement for studying the V-I characteristics
of a diode, (i.e., the variation of current as a function of applied
FIGURE 14.15 (a) Diode
voltage) are shown in Fig. 14.16(a) and (b). The battery is connected
under reverse bias,
to the diode through a potentiometer (or reheostat) so that the
(b) Barrier potential under
applied voltage to the diode can be changed. For different values
reverse bias.
of voltages, the value of the current is noted. A graph between V
and I is obtained as in Fig. 14.16(c). Note that in forward bias
measurement, we use a milliammeter since the expected current is large
(as explained in the earlier section) while a micrometer is used in reverse
bias to measure the current. You can see in Fig. 14.16(c) that in forward
FIGURE 14.16 Experimental circuit arrangement for studying V-I characteristics of
a p-n junction diode (a) in forward bias, (b) in reverse bias. (c) Typical V-I
336 characteristics of a silicon diode.
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
337
EXAMPLE
14.4
bias, the current first increases very slowly, almost negligibly, till the
voltage across the diode crosses a certain value. After the characteristic
voltage, the diode current increases significantly (exponentially), even for
a very small increase in the diode bias voltage. This voltage is called the
threshold voltage or cut-in voltage (~0.2V for germanium diode and
~0.7 V for silicon diode).
For the diode in reverse bias, the current is very small (~mA) and almost
remains constant with change in bias. It is called reverse saturation
current. However, for special cases, at very high reverse bias (break down
voltage), the current suddenly increases. This special action of the diode
is discussed later in Section 14.8. The general purpose diode are not
used beyond the reverse saturation current region.
The above discussion shows that the p-n junction diode primerly
allows the flow of current only in one direction (forward bias). The forward
bias resistance is low as compared to the reverse bias resistance. This
property is used for rectification of ac voltages as discussed in the next
section. For diodes, we define a quantity called dynamic resistance as
the ratio of small change in voltage DV to a small change in current DI:
D V
r = (14.6)
d D I
Example 14.4 The V-I characteristic of a silicon diode is shown in
the Fig. 14.17. Calculate the resistance of the diode at (a) I = 15 mA
D
and (b) V = –10 V.
D
FIGURE 14.17
Solution Considering the diode characteristics as a straight line
between I = 10 mA to I = 20 mA passing through the origin, we can
calculate the resistance using Ohm’s law.
(a) From the curve, at I = 20 mA, V = 0.8 V; I = 10 mA, V = 0.7 V
r = DV/DI = 0.1V/10 mA = 10 W
fb
(b) From the curve at V = –10 V, I = –1 mA,
Therefore,
r = 10 V/1mA= 1.0 × 107 W
rb
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
14.7 A J D R
PPLICATION OF UNCTION IODE AS A ECTIFIER
From the V-I characteristic of a junction diode we see that it allows current
to pass only when it is forward biased. So if an alternating voltage is
applied across a diode the current flows only in that part of the cycle
when the diode is forward biased. This property
is used to rectify alternating voltages and the
circuit used for this purpose is called a rectifier.
If an alternating voltage is applied across a
diode in series with a load, a pulsating voltage will
appear across the load only during the half cycles
of the ac input during which the diode is forward
biased. Such rectifier circuit, as shown in
Fig. 14.18, is called a half-wave rectifier. The
secondary of a transformer supplies the desired
ac voltage across terminals A and B. When the
voltage at A is positive, the diode is forward biased
and it conducts. When A is negative, the diode is
reverse-biased and it does not conduct. The reverse
saturation current of a diode is negligible and can
be considered equal to zero for practical purposes.
(The reverse breakdown voltage of the diode must
be sufficiently higher than the peak ac voltage at
the secondary of the transformer to protect the
diode from reverse breakdown.)
Therefore, in the positive half-cycle of ac there
FIGURE 14.18 (a) Half-wave rectifier
is a current through the load resistor R and we
circuit, (b) Input ac voltage and output L
get an output voltage, as shown in Fig. 14.18(b),
voltage waveforms from the rectifier circuit.
whereas there is no current in the negative half-
cycle. In the next positive half-cycle, again we get
the output voltage. Thus, the output voltage, though still varying, is
restricted to only one direction and is said to be rectified. Since the
rectified output of this circuit is only for half of the input ac wave it is
called as half-wave rectifier.
The circuit using two diodes, shown in Fig. 14.19(a), gives output
rectified voltage corresponding to both the positive as well as negative
half of the ac cycle. Hence, it is known as full-wave rectifier. Here the
p-side of the two diodes are connected to the ends of the secondary of the
transformer. The n-side of the diodes are connected together and the
output is taken between this common point of diodes and the midpoint
of the secondary of the transformer. So for a full-wave rectifier the
secondary of the transformer is provided with a centre tapping and so it
is called centre-tap transformer. As can be seen from Fig.14.19(c) the
voltage rectified by each diode is only half the total secondary voltage.
Each diode rectifies only for half the cycle, but the two do so for alternate
cycles. Thus, the output between their common terminals and the centre-
tap of the transformer becomes a full-wave rectifier output. (Note that
there is another circuit of full wave rectifier which does not need a centre-
338 tap transformer but needs four diodes.) Suppose the input voltage to A
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
with respect to the centre tap at any instant
is positive. It is clear that, at that instant,
voltage at B being out of phase will be
negative as shown in Fig.14.19(b). So, diode
D gets forward biased and conducts (while
1
D being reverse biased is not conducting).
2
Hence, during this positive half cycle we get
an output current (and a output voltage
across the load resistor R ) as shown in
L
Fig.14.19(c). In the course of the ac cycle
when the voltage at A becomes negative with
respect to centre tap, the voltage at B would
be positive. In this part of the cycle diode
D would not conduct but diode D would,
1 2
giving an output current and output
voltage (across R ) during the negative half
L
cycle of the input ac. Thus, we get output
voltage during both the positive as well as
the negative half of the cycle. Obviously,
this is a more efficient circuit for getting
rectified voltage or current than the half-
wave rectifier.
The rectified voltage is in the form of
pulses of the shape of half sinusoids.
Though it is unidirectional it does not have
a steady value. To get steady dc output
from the pulsating voltage normally a
capacitor is connected across the output
terminals (parallel to the load R ). One can
L
also use an inductor in series with R for
L
the same purpose. Since these additional FIGURE 14.19 (a) A Full-wave rectifier
circuit; (b) Input wave forms given to the
circuits appear to filter out the ac ripple
diode D at A and to the diode D at B;
and give a pure dc voltage, so they are 1 2
(c) Output waveform across the
called filters.
load R connected in the full-wave
Now we shall discuss the role of L
rectifier circuit.
capacitor in filtering. When the voltage
across the capacitor is rising, it gets
charged. If there is no external load, it remains charged to the peak voltage
of the rectified output. When there is a load, it gets discharged through
the load and the voltage across it begins to fall. In the next half-cycle of
rectified output it again gets charged to the peak value (Fig. 14.20). The
rate of fall of the voltage across the capacitor depends inversely upon the
product of capacitance C and the effective resistance R used in the circuit
L
and is called the time constant. To make the time constant large value of
C should be large. So capacitor input filters use large capacitors. The
output voltage obtained by using capacitor input filter is nearer to the
peak voltage of the rectified voltage. This type of filter is most widely
339
used in power supplies.
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
FIGURE 14.20 (a) A full-wave rectifier with capacitor filter, (b) Input and output
voltage of rectifier in (a).
SUMMARY
1. Semiconductors are the basic materials used in the present solid state
electronic devices like diode, transistor, ICs, etc.
2. Lattice structure and the atomic structure of constituent elements
decide whether a particular material will be insulator, metal or
semiconductor.
3. Metals have low resistivity (10–2 to 10–8 Wm), insulators have very high
resistivity (>108 Wm–1), while semiconductors have intermediate values
of resistivity.
4. Semiconductors are elemental (Si, Ge) as well as compound (GaAs,
CdS, etc.).
5. Pure semiconductors are called ‘intrinsic semiconductors’. The presence
of charge carriers (electrons and holes) is an ‘intrinsic’ property of the
material and these are obtained as a result of thermal excitation. The
number of electrons (n ) is equal to the number of holes (n ) in intrinsic
e h
conductors. Holes are essentially electron vacancies with an effective
positive charge.
6. The number of charge carriers can be changed by ‘doping’ of a suitable
impurity in pure semiconductors. Such semiconductors are known as
extrinsic semiconductors. These are of two types (n-type and p-type).
7. In n-type semiconductors, n >> n while in p-type semiconductors n >> n.
e h h e
8. n-type semiconducting Si or Ge is obtained by doping with pentavalent
atoms (donors) like As, Sb, P, etc., while p-type Si or Ge can be obtained
by doping with trivalent atom (acceptors) like B, Al, In etc.
9. n n = n2 in all cases. Further, the material possesses an overall charge
e h i
neutrality.
10. There are two distinct band of energies (called valence band and
conduction band) in which the electrons in a material lie. Valence
band energies are low as compared to conduction band energies. All
energy levels in the valence band are filled while energy levels in the
conduction band may be fully empty or partially filled. The electrons in
the conduction band are free to move in a solid and are responsible for
the conductivity. The extent of conductivity depends upon the energy
gap (E ) between the top of valence band (E ) and the bottom of the
g V
conduction band E . The electrons from valence band can be excited by
C
340
Rationalised 2023-24Semiconductor Electronics:
Materials, Devices and
Simple Circuits
heat, light or electrical energy to the conduction band and thus, produce
a change in the current flowing in a semiconductor.
11. For insulators E > 3 eV, for semiconductors E is 0.2 eV to 3 eV, while
g g
for metals E » 0.
g
12. p-n junction is the ‘key’ to all semiconductor devices. When such a
junction is made, a ‘depletion layer’ is formed consisting of immobile
ion-cores devoid of their electrons or holes. This is responsible for a
junction potential barrier.
13. By changing the external applied voltage, junction barriers can be
changed. In forward bias (n-side is connected to negative terminal of the
battery and p-side is connected to the positive), the barrier is decreased
while the barrier increases in reverse bias. Hence, forward bias current
is more (mA) while it is very small (mA) in a p-n junction diode.
14. Diodes can be used for rectifying an ac voltage (restricting the ac voltage
to one direction). With the help of a capacitor or a suitable filter, a dc
voltage can be obtained.
POINTS TO PONDER
1. The energy bands (E or E ) in the semiconductors are space delocalised
C V
which means that these are not located in any specific place inside the
solid. The energies are the overall averages. When you see a picture in
which E or E are drawn as straight lines, then they should be
C V
respectively taken simply as the bottom of conduction band energy levels
and top of valence band energy levels.
2. In elemental semiconductors (Si or Ge), the n-type or p-type
semiconductors are obtained by introducing ‘dopants’ as defects. In
compound semiconductors, the change in relative stoichiometric ratio
can also change the type of semiconductor. For example, in ideal GaAs
the ratio of Ga:As is 1:1 but in Ga-rich or As-rich GaAs it could
respectively be Ga As or Ga As . In general, the presence of
1.1 0.9 0.9 1.1
defects control the properties of semiconductors in many ways.
EXERCISES
14.1 In an n-type silicon, which of the following statement is true:
(a) Electrons are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the
dopants.
(b) Electrons are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(c) Holes are minority carriers and pentavalent atoms are the
dopants.
(d) Holes are majority carriers and trivalent atoms are the dopants.
14.2 Which of the statements given in Exercise 14.1 is true for p-type
semiconductos.
14.3 Carbon, silicon and germanium have four valence electrons each.
These are characterised by valence and conduction bands separated
341
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
by energy band gap respectively equal to (E ) , (E ) and (E ) . Which
g C gSi g Ge
of the following statements is true?
(a) (E ) < (E ) < (E )
gSi gGe g C
(b) (E ) < (E ) > (E )
gC g Ge gSi
(c) (E ) > (E ) > (E )
gC g Si gGe
(d) (E ) = (E ) = (E )
gC g Si gGe
14.4 In an unbiased p-n junction, holes diffuse from the p-region to
n-region because
(a) free electrons in the n-region attract them.
(b) they move across the junction by the potential difference.
(c) hole concentration in p-region is more as compared to n-region.
(d) All the above.
14.5 When a forward bias is applied to a p-n junction, it
(a) raises the potential barrier.
(b) reduces the majority carrier current to zero.
(c) lowers the potential barrier.
(d) None of the above.
14.6 In half-wave rectification, what is the output frequency if the input
frequency is 50 Hz. What is the output frequency of a full-wave rectifier
for the same input frequency.
342
Rationalised 2023-24Notes
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
A
PPENDICES
APPENDIX A 1
THE GREEK ALPHABET
APPENDIX A 2
COMMON SI PREFIXES AND SYMBOLS FOR MULTIPLES AND SUB-MULTIPLES
344
Rationalised 2023-24ApApneswndeicrses
APPENDIX A 3
SOME IMPORTANT CONSTANTS
OTHER USEFUL CONSTANTS
345
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
ANSWERS
CHAPTER 9
9.1 v = –54 cm. The image is real, inverted and magnified. The size of the
image is 5.0 cm. As u fi f, v fi ¥; for u < f, image is virtual.
9.2 v = 6.7 cm. Magnification = 5/9, i.e., the size of the image is 2.5 cm. As
u fi ¥; v fi f (but never beyond) while m fi 0.
9.3 1.33; 1.7 cm
9.4 n = 1.51; n = 1.32; n = 1.144; which gives sin r = 0.6181 i.e.,
ga wa gw
r ~ 38°.
9.5 r = 0.8 × tan i and sini =1/1.33@ 0.75, where r is the radius (in m)
c c
of the largest circle from which light comes out and i is the critical
c
angle for water-air interface, Area = 2.6 m2
9.6 n @ 1.53 and D for prism in water @ 10°
m
9.7 R = 22 cm
9.8 Here the object is virtual and the image is real. u = +12 cm (object on
right; virtual)
(a) f = +20 cm. Image is real and at 7.5 cm from the lens on its right
side.
(b) f = –16 cm. Image is real and at 48 cm from the lens on its right side.
9.9 v = 8.4 cm, image is erect and virtual. It is diminished to a size
1.8 cm. As u fi ¥, v fi f (but never beyond f while m fi 0).
Note that when the object is placed at the focus of the concave lens
(21 cm), the image is located at 10.5 cm (not at infinity as one might
wrongly think).
9.10 A diverging lens of focal length 60 cm
9.11 (a) v = –25 cm and f = 6.25 cm give u = –5 cm; v = (15 – 5) cm =
e e e O
10 cm,
f = u = – 2.5 cm; Magnifying power = 20
O O
(b) u = – 2.59 cm.
O
Magnifying power = 13.5.
9.12 Angular magnification of the eye-piece for image at 25 cm
25 25
 111; |u |= cm =2.27cm; v = 7.2 cm
2.5 e 11 O
Separation = 9.47 cm; Magnifying power = 88
9.13 24; 150 cm
9.14 (a) Angular magnification = 1500
346
(b) Diameter of the image = 13.7 cm.
Rationalised 2023-24Answers
9.15 Apply mirror equation and the condition:
(a) f < 0 (concave mirror); u < 0 (object on left)
(b) f > 0; u < 0
(c) f > 0 (convex mirror) and u < 0
(d) f < 0 (concave mirror); f < u < 0
to deduce the desired result.
9.16 The pin appears raised by 5.0 cm. It can be seen with an explicit ray
diagram that the answer is independent of the location of the slab
(for small angles of incidence).
9.17 (a) sin i¢= 1.44/1.68 which gives i¢ = 59°. Total internal reflection
c c
takes place when i > 59(cid:176) or when r < r = 31°. Now,
max
(sini /sinr )=1.68, which gives i ~ 60°. Thus, all
max max max
incident rays of angles in the range 0 < i < 60° will suffer total
internal reflections in the pipe. (If the length of the pipe is
finite, which it is in practice, there will be a lower limit on i
determined by the ratio of the diameter to the length of the
pipe.)
(b) If there is no outer coating, i¢ = sin–1(1/1.68) = 36.5°. Now,
c
i = 90° will have r = 36.5° and i¢ = 53.5° which is greater than
i¢. Thus, all incident rays (in the range 53.5° < i < 90°) will
c
suffer total internal reflections.
9.18 For fixed distance s between object and screen, the lens equation
does not give a real solution for u or v if f is greater than s/4.
Therefore, f = 0.75 m.
max
9.19 21.4 cm
9.20 (a) (i) Let a parallel beam be the incident from the left on the convex
lens first.
f = 30 cm and u = – , give v = + 30 cm. This image becomes
1 1 1
a virtual object for the second lens.
f = –20 cm, u = + (30 – 8) cm = + 22 cm which gives,
2 2
v = – 220 cm. The parallel incident beam appears to diverge
2
from a point 216 cm from the centre of the two-lens system.
(ii) Let the parallel beam be incident from the left on the concave
lens first: f = – 20 cm, u = – ¥, give v = – 20 cm. This image
1 1 1
becomes a real object for the second lens: f = + 30 cm, u =
2 2
– (20 + 8) cm = – 28 cm which gives, v = – 420 cm. The parallel
2
incident beam appears to diverge from a point 416 cm on the
left of the centre of the two-lens system.
Clearly, the answer depends on which side of the lens system
the parallel beam is incident. Further we do not have a simple lens
equation true for all u (and v) in terms of a definite constant of the
system (the constant being determined by f and f , and the separation
1 2
between the lenses). The notion of effective focal length, therefore,
does not seem to be meaningful for this system.
(b) u = – 40 cm, f = 30 cm, gives v = 120 cm.
1 1 1
Magnitude of magnification due to the first (convex) lens is 3.
u = + (120 – 8) cm = +112 cm (object virtual);
2
112· 20
f = – 20 cm which gives v =- cm
2 2 92
347
Magnitude of magnification due to the second (concave)
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
lens = 20/92.
Net magnitude of magnification = 0.652
Size of the image = 0.98 cm
9.21 If the refracted ray in the prism is incident on the second face at the
critical angle i , the angle of refraction r at the first face is (60°–i ).
c c
Now, i = sin–1 (1/1.524) ~ 41°
c
Therefore, r = 19°
sin i = 0.4962; i ~ 30°
1 1 1
+ =
9.22 (a)
v 9 10
i.e., v = – 90 cm,
Magnitude of magnification = 90/9 = 10.
Each square in the virtual image has an area 10 × 10 × 1 mm2
= 100 mm2 = 1 cm2
(b) Magnifying power = 25/9 = 2.8
(c) No, magnification of an image by a lens and angular magnification
(or magnifying power) of an optical instrument are two separate
things. The latter is the ratio of the angular size of the object
(which is equal to the angular size of the image even if the image
is magnified) to the angular size of the object if placed at the near
point (25 cm). Thus, magnification magnitude is |(v/u)| and
magnifying power is (25/ |u|). Only when the image is located at
the near point |v| = 25 cm, are the two quantities equal.
9.23 (a) Maximum magnifying power is obtained when the image is at
the near point (25 cm)
u = – 7.14 cm.
(b) Magnitude of magnification = (25/ |u|) = 3.5.
(c) Magnifying power = 3.5
Yes, the magnifying power (when the image is produced at 25 cm)
is equal to the magnitude of magnification.
9.24 Magnification = (6.25/1) = 2.5
v = +2.5u
1 1 1
  
2.5u u 10
i.e.,u = – 6 cm
|v| = 15 cm
The virtual image is closer than the normal near point (25 cm) and
cannot be seen by the eye distinctly.
9.25 (a) Even though the absolute image size is bigger than the object
size, the angular size of the image is equal to the angular size of
the object. The magnifier helps in the following way: without it
object would be placed no closer than 25 cm; with it the object
can be placed much closer. The closer object has larger angular
size than the same object at 25 cm. It is in this sense that angular
magnification is achieved.
(b) Yes, it decreases a little because the angle subtended at the eye
is then slightly less than the angle subtended at the lens. The
348
Rationalised 2023-24Answers
effect is negligible if the image is at a very large distance away.
[Note: When the eye is separated from the lens, the angles
subtended at the eye by the first object and its image are not
equal.]
(c) First, grinding lens of very small focal length is not easy. More
important, if you decrease focal length, aberrations (both spherical
and chromatic) become more pronounced. So, in practice, you
cannot get a magnifying power of more than 3 or so with a simple
convex lens. However, using an aberration corrected lens system,
one can increase this limit by a factor of 10 or so.
(d) Angular magnification of eye-piece is [(25/f ) + 1] (f in cm) which
e e
increases if f is smaller. Further, magnification of the objective
e
v 1
O =
is given by |u | (|u |/ f )- 1
O O O
which is large when |u | is slightly greater than f . The micro-
O O
scope is used for viewing very close object. So |u | is small, and
O
so is f .
O
(e) The image of the objective in the eye-piece is known as ‘eye-ring’.
All the rays from the object refracted by objective go through the
eye-ring. Therefore, it is an ideal position for our eyes for viewing.
If we place our eyes too close to the eye-piece, we shall not collect
much of the light and also reduce our field of view. If we position
our eyes on the eye-ring and the area of the pupil of our eye is
greater or equal to the area of the eye-ring, our eyes will collect
all the light refracted by the objective. The precise location of
the eye-ring naturally depends on the separation between the
objective and the eye-piece. When you view through a microscope
by placing your eyes on one end,the ideal distance between the
eyes and eye-piece is usually built-in the design of the
instrument.
9.26 Assume microscope in normal use i.e., image at 25 cm. Angular
magnification of the eye-piece
25
= 16
5
Magnification of the objective
30
= 5
6
1 1 1
- =
5u u 1.25
O O
which gives u = –1.5 cm; v = 7.5 cm. |u | (25/6) cm = 4.17 cm. The
O 0 e
separation between the objective and the eye-piece should be (7.5 +
4.17) cm = 11.67 cm. Further the object should be placed 1.5 cm from
the objective to obtain the desired magnification.
9.27 (a) m = (f /f ) = 28
O e
f Ø f ø
(b) m = O Œ1+ Oœ = 33.6
f º 25ß
e 349
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
9.28 (a) f + f = 145 cm
O e
(b) Angle subtended by the tower = (100/3000) = (1/30) rad.
Angle subtended by the image produced by the objective
h h
= =
f 140
O
Equating the two, h = 4.7 cm.
(c) Magnification (magnitude) of the eye-piece = 6. Height of the
final image (magnitude) = 28 cm.
9.29 The image formed by the larger (concave) mirror acts as virtual object
for the smaller (convex) mirror. Parallel rays coming from the object
at infinity will focus at a distance of 110 mm from the larger mirror.
The distance of virtual object for the smaller mirror = (110 –20) =
90 mm. The focal length of smaller mirror is 70 mm. Using the mirror
formula, image is formed at 315 mm from the smaller mirror.
9.30 The reflected rays get deflected by twice the angle of rotation of the
mirror. Therefore, d/1.5 = tan 7°. Hence d = 18.4 cm.
9.31 n = 1.33
CHAPTER 10
10.1 (a) Reflected light: (wavelength, frequency, speed same as incident
light)
l = 589 nm, n = 5.09 · 1014 Hz, c = 3.00 · 108 m s–1
(b) Refracted light: (frequency same as the incident frequency)
n = 5.09 · 1014Hz
v = (c/n) = 2.26 × 108 m s–1, l = (v/n) = 444 nm
10.2 (a) Spherical
(b) Plane
(c) Plane (a small area on the surface of a large sphere is nearly
planar).
10.3 (a) 2.0 × 108 m s–1
(b) No. The refractive index, and hence the speed of light in a
medium, depends on wavelength. [When no particular
wavelength or colour of light is specified, we may take the given
refractive index to refer to yellow colour.] Now we know violet
colour deviates more than red in a glass prism, i.e. n > n.
v r
Therefore, the violet component of white light travels slower than
the red component.
1.210–20.2810–3
10.4  m = 600 nm
41.4
10.5 K/4
10.6 (a) 1.17 mm (b) 1.56 mm
10.7 0.15°
350
10.8 tan–1(1.5) ~ 56.3o
Rationalised 2023-24Answers
10.9 5000 Å, 6 × 1014 Hz; 45°
10.10 40 m
CHAPTER 11
11.1 (a) 7.24 × 1018 Hz (b) 0.041 nm
11.2 (a) 0.34 eV = 0.54 × 10–19J (b) 0.34 V (c) 344 km/s
11.3 1.5 eV = 2.4 × 10–19 J
11.4 (a) 3.14 × 10–19J, 1.05 × 10–27 kg m/s (b) 3 × 1016 photons/s
(c) 0.63 m/s
11.5 6.59 × 10–34 J s
11.6 2.0 V
11.7 No, because n < n
o
11.8 4.73 × 1014 Hz
11.9 2.16 eV = 3.46 × 10–19J
11.10 (a) 1.7 × 10–35 m (b) 1.1 × 10–32 m (c) 3.0 × 10–23 m
11.11 l = h/p = h/(hn/c) = c/n
CHAPTER 12
12.1 (a) No different from
(b) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(c) Rutherford’s model
(d) Thomson’s model; Rutherford’s model
(e) Both the models
12.2 The nucleus of a hydrogen atom is a proton. The mass of it is
1.67 × 10–27 kg, whereas the mass of an incident a-particle is
6.64 × 10–27 kg. Because the scattering particle is more massive than
the target nuclei (proton), the a-particle won’t bounce back in even
in a head-on collision. It is similar to a football colliding with a tenis
ball at rest. Thus, there would be no large-angle scattering.
12.3 5.6 · 1014 Hz
12.4 13.6 eV; –27.2 eV
12.5 9.7 × 10–8 m; 3.1 × 1015 Hz.
12.6 (a) 2.18 × 106 m/s; 1.09 × 106 m/s; 7.27 × 105 m/s
(b) 1.52 × 10–16 s; 1.22 × 10–15 s; 4.11 × 10–15 s.
12.7 2.12·10–10 m; 4.77 · 10–10 m
12.8 Lyman series: 103 nm and 122 nm; Balmer series: 656 nm.
12.9 2.6 × 1074
CHAPTER 13
13.1 104.7 MeV
13.2 8.79 MeV, 7.84 MeV
13.3 1.584 × 1025 MeV or 2.535×1012J
351
13.4 1.23
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
13.5 (i) Q = –4.03 MeV; endothermic
(ii) Q = 4.62 MeV; exothermic
( ) ( )
13.6 Q = m 56Fe –2m 28Al = 26.90 MeV; not possible.
26 13
13.7 4.536 × 1026 MeV
13.8 About 4.9 × 104 y
13.9 360 KeV
CHAPTER 14
14.1 (c)
14.2 (d)
14.3 (c)
14.4 (c)
14.5 (c)
14.6 50 Hz for half-wave, 100 Hz for full-wave
352
Rationalised 2023-24Bibligraphy
B
IBLIOGRAPHY
TEXTBOOKS
For additional reading on the topics covered in this book, you may like to consult one or more of the following
books. Some of these books however are more advanced and contain many more topics than this book.
1 Ordinary Level Physics, A.F. Abbott, Arnold-Heinemann (1984).
2 Advanced Level Physics, M. Nelkon and P. Parker, 6th Edition, Arnold-Heinemann (1987).
3 Advanced Physics, Tom Duncan, John Murray (2000).
4 Fundamentals of Physics, David Halliday, Robert Resnick and Jearl Walker, 7th Edition
John Wily (2004).
5 University Physics (Sears and Zemansky’s), H.D. Young and R.A. Freedman, 11th Edition,
Addison—Wesley (2004).
6 Problems in Elementary Physics, B. Bukhovtsa, V. Krivchenkov, G. Myakishev and
V. Shalnov, MIR Publishers, (1971).
7 Lectures on Physics (3 volumes), R.P. Feynman, Addision – Wesley (1965).
8 Berkeley Physics Course (5 volumes) McGraw Hill (1965).
a. Vol. 1 – Mechanics: (Kittel, Knight and Ruderman)
b. Vol. 2 – Electricity and Magnetism (E.M. Purcell)
c. Vol. 3 – Waves and Oscillations (Frank S. Crawford)
d. Vol. 4 – Quantum Physics (Wichmann)
e. Vol. 5 – Statistical Physics (F. Reif)
9 Fundamental University Physics, M. Alonso and E. J. Finn, Addison – Wesley (1967).
10 College Physics, R.L. Weber, K.V. Manning, M.W. White and G.A. Weygand, Tata McGraw
Hill (1977).
11 Physics: Foundations and Frontiers, G. Gamow and J.M. Cleveland, Tata McGraw Hill
(1978).
12 Physics for the Inquiring Mind, E.M. Rogers, Princeton University Press (1960).
13 PSSC Physics Course, DC Heath and Co. (1965) Indian Edition, NCERT (1967).
14 Physics Advanced Level, Jim Breithampt, Stanley Thornes Publishers (2000).
15 Physics, Patrick Fullick, Heinemann (2000).
16 Conceptual Physics, Paul G. Hewitt, Addision—Wesley (1998).
17 College Physics, Raymond A. Serway and Jerry S. Faughn, Harcourt Brace and Co. (1999).
18 University Physics, Harris Benson, John Wiley (1996).
19 University Physics, William P. Crummet and Arthur B. Western, Wm.C. Brown (1994).
20 General Physics, Morton M. Sternheim and Joseph W. Kane, John Wiley (1988).
21 Physics, Hans C. Ohanian, W.W. Norton (1989).
Rationalised 2023-24Physics
22 Advanced Physics, Keith Gibbs, Cambridge University Press (1996).
23 Understanding Basic Mechanics, F. Reif, John Wiley (1995).
24 College Physics, Jerry D. Wilson and Anthony J. Buffa, Prentice Hall (1997).
25 Senior Physics, Part – I, I.K. Kikoin and A.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1987).
26 Senior Physics, Part – II, B. Bekhovtsev, MIR Publishers (1988).
27 Understanding Physics, K. Cummings, Patrick J. Cooney, Priscilla W. Laws and Edward F.
Redish, John Wiley (2005).
28 Essentials of Physics, John D. Cutnell and Kenneth W. Johnson, John Wiley (2005).
GENERAL BOOKS
For instructive and entertaining general reading on science, you may like to read some of the following books.
Remember however, that many of these books are written at a level far beyond the level of the present book.
1 Mr. Tompkins in paperback, G. Gamow, Cambridge University Press (1967).
2 The Universe and Dr. Einstein, C. Barnett, Time Inc. New York (1962).
3 Thirty years that Shook Physics, G. Gamow, Double Day, New York (1966).
4 Surely You’re Joking, Mr. Feynman, R.P. Feynman, Bantam books (1986).
5 One, Two, Three… Infinity, G. Gamow, Viking Inc. (1961).
6 The Meaning of Relativity, A. Einstein, (Indian Edition) Oxford and IBH Pub. Co. (1965).
7 Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature, Niels Bohr, Cambridge (1934).
8 The Physical Principles of Quantum Theory, W. Heisenberg, University of Chicago Press
(1930).
9 The Physics—Astronomy Frontier, F. Hoyle and J.V. Narlikar, W.H. Freeman (1980).
10 The Flying Circus of Physics with Answer, J. Walker, John Wiley and Sons (1977).
11 Physics for Everyone (series), L.D. Landau and A.I. Kitaigorodski, MIR Publisher (1978).
Book 1: Physical Bodies
Book 2: Molecules
Book 3: Electrons
Book 4: Photons and Nuclei.
12 Physics can be Fun, Y. Perelman, MIR Publishers (1986).
13 Power of Ten, Philip Morrison and Eames, W.H. Freeman (1985).
14 Physics in your Kitchen Lab., I.K. Kikoin, MIR Publishers (1985).
15 How Things Work: The Physics of Everyday Life, Louis A. Bloomfield, John Wiley (2005).
16 Physics Matters: An Introduction to Conceptual Physics, James Trefil and Robert M.
Hazen, John Wiley (2004).
354
Rationalised 2023-24