55
UUUUUnnnnniiiiittttt
CCoooorrddiinnaattiioonn
Objectives
CCoommppoouunnddss
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• appreciate the postulates of
Werner’s theory of coordination
compounds;
Coordination Compounds are the backbone of modern inorganic
• know the meaning of the terms:
and bio–inorganic chemistry and chemical industry.
coordination entity, central atom/
ion, ligand, coordination number,
coordination sphere, coordination In the previous Unit we learnt that the transition metals
polyhedron, oxidation number, form a large number of complex compounds in which
homoleptic and heteroleptic;
the metal atoms are bound to a number of anions or
• learn the rules of nomenclature neutral molecules by sharing of electrons. In modern
of coordination compounds;
terminology such compounds are called coordination
• write the formulas and names
compounds. The chemistry of coordination compounds
of mononuclear coordination
is an important and challenging area of modern
compounds;
inorganic chemistry. New concepts of chemical bonding
• define different types of isomerism
and molecular structure have provided insights into
in coordination compounds;
the functioning of these compounds as vital components
• understand the nature of bonding
of biological systems. Chlorophyll, haemoglobin and
in coordination compounds in
vitamin B are coordination compounds of magnesium,
terms of the Valence Bond and 12
iron and cobalt respectively. Variety of metallurgical
Crystal Field theories;
processes, industrial catalysts and analytical reagents
• appreciate the importance and
involve the use of coordination compounds.
applications of coordination
compounds in our day to day life. Coordination compounds also find many applications
in electroplating, textile dyeing and medicinal chemistry.
55555.....11111 WWWWWeeeeerrrrrnnnnneeeeerrrrr’’’’’sssss Alfred Werner (1866-1919), a Swiss chemist was the first to formulate
his ideas about the structures of coordination compounds. He prepared
TTTTThhhhheeeeeooooorrrrryyyyy ooooofffff
and characterised a large number of coordination compounds and
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn studied their physical and chemical behaviour by simple experimental
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss techniques. Werner proposed the concept of a primary valence and
a secondary valence for a metal ion. Binary compounds such as
CrCl , CoCl or PdCl have primary valence of 3, 2 and 2 respectively.
3 2 2
In a series of compounds of cobalt(III) chloride with ammonia, it was
found that some of the chloride ions could be precipitated as AgCl on
adding excess silver nitrate solution in cold but some remained in
solution.
Chemistry 118
Rationalised 2023-241 mol CoCl .6NH (Yellow) gave 3 mol AgCl
3 3
1 mol CoCl .5NH (Purple) gave 2 mol AgCl
3 3
1 mol CoCl .4NH (Green) gave 1 mol AgCl
3 3
1 mol CoCl .4NH (Violet) gave 1 mol AgCl
3 3
These observations, together with the results of conductivity
measurements in solution can be explained if (i) six groups in all,
either chloride ions or ammonia molecules or both, remain bonded to
the cobalt ion during the reaction and (ii) the compounds are formulated
as shown in Table 5.1, where the atoms within the square brackets
form a single entity which does not dissociate under the reaction
conditions. Werner proposed the term secondary valence for the
number of groups bound directly to the metal ion; in each of these
examples the secondary valences are six.
Table 5.1: Formulation of Cobalt(III) Chloride-Ammonia Complexes
Colour Formula Solution conductivity
corresponds to
Yellow [Co(NH ) ]3+3Cl– 1:3 electrolyte
36
Purple [CoCl(NH ) ]2+2Cl– 1:2 electrolyte
3 5
Green [CoCl (NH ) ]+Cl– 1:1 electrolyte
2 34
Violet [CoCl (NH ) ]+Cl– 1:1 electrolyte
2 34
Note that the last two compounds in Table 5.1 have identical empirical
formula, CoCl .4NH , but distinct properties. Such compounds are
3 3
termed as isomers. Werner in 1898, propounded his theory of
coordination compounds. The main postulates are:
1. In coordination compounds metals show two types of linkages
(valences)-primary and secondary.
2. The primary valences are normally ionisable and are satisfied by
negative ions.
3. The secondary valences are non ionisable. These are satisfied by
neutral molecules or negative ions. The secondary valence is equal to
the coordination number and is fixed for a metal.
4. The ions/groups bound by the secondary linkages to the metal have
characteristic spatial arrangements corresponding to different
coordination numbers.
In modern formulations, such spatial arrangements are called
coordination polyhedra. The species within the square bracket are
coordination entities or complexes and the ions outside the square
bracket are called counter ions.
He further postulated that octahedral, tetrahedral and square planar
geometrical shapes are more common in coordination compounds of
transition metals. Thus, [Co(NH ) ]3+, [CoCl(NH ) ]2+ and [CoCl (NH ) ]+
3 6 3 5 2 3 4
are octahedral entities, while [Ni(CO) ] and [PtCl ]2– are tetrahedral and
4 4
square planar, respectively.
119 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24On the basis of the following observations made with aqueous solutions, EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....11111
assign secondary valences to metals in the following compounds:
Formula Moles of AgCl precipitated per mole of
the compounds with excess AgNO
3
(i) PdCl .4NH 2
2 3
(ii) NiCl .6H O 2
2 2
(iii) PtCl .2HCl 0
4
(iv) CoCl .4NH 1
3 3
(v) PtCl .2NH 0
2 3
(i) Secondary 4 (ii) Secondary 6 SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(iii) Secondary 6 (iv) Secondary 6 (v) Secondary 4
Difference between a double salt and a complex
Both double salts as well as complexes are formed by the combination
of two or more stable compounds in stoichiometric ratio. However, they
differ in the fact that double salts such as carnallite, KCl.MgCl .6H O,
2 2
Mohr’s salt, FeSO .(NH ) SO .6H O, potash alum, KAl(SO ) .12H O, etc.
4 4 2 4 2 4 2 2
dissociate into simple ions completely when dissolved in water. However,
complex ions such as [Fe(CN) ]4– of K [Fe(CN) ] do not dissociate into
6 4 6
Fe2+ and CN– ions.
WWWWWeeeeerrrrrnnnnneeeeerrrrr
was born on December 12, 1866, in Mülhouse,
a small community in the French province of Alsace.
His study of chemistry began in Karlsruhe (Germany)
and continued in Zurich (Switzerland), where in his
doctoral thesis in 1890, he explained the difference in
properties of certain nitrogen containing organic
(((((11111888886666666666-----11111999991111199999))))) substances on the basis of isomerism. He extended vant
Hoff’s theory of tetrahedral carbon atom and modified
it for nitrogen. Werner showed optical and electrical differences between
complex compounds based on physical measurements. In fact, Werner was
the first to discover optical activity in certain coordination compounds.
He, at the age of 29 years became a full professor at Technische
Hochschule in Zurich in 1895. Alfred Werner was a chemist and educationist.
His accomplishments included the development of the theory of coordination
compounds. This theory, in which Werner proposed revolutionary ideas about
how atoms and molecules are linked together, was formulated in a span of
only three years, from 1890 to 1893. The remainder of his career was spent
gathering the experimental support required to validate his new ideas. Werner
became the first Swiss chemist to win the Nobel Prize in 1913 for his work
on the linkage of atoms and the coordination theory.
Chemistry 120
Rationalised 2023-2455555.....22222 DDDDDeeeeefffffiiiiinnnnniiiiitttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss ooooofffff (a) Coordination entity
A coordination entity constitutes a central metal atom or ion bonded
SSSSSooooommmmmeeeee
to a fixed number of ions or molecules. For example, [CoCl (NH ) ]
IIIIImmmmmpppppooooorrrrrtttttaaaaannnnnttttt 3 3 3
is a coordination entity in which the cobalt ion is surrounded by
TTTTTeeeeerrrrrmmmmmsssss three ammonia molecules and three chloride ions. Other examples
are [Ni(CO) ], [PtCl (NH ) ], [Fe(CN) ]4–, [Co(NH ) ]3+.
PPPPPeeeeerrrrrtttttaaaaaiiiiinnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg tttttooooo 4 2 3 2 6 3 6
(b) Central atom/ion
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
In a coordination entity, the atom/ion to which a fixed number
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
of ions/groups are bound in a definite geometrical arrangement
around it, is called the central atom or ion. For example, the
central atom/ion in the coordination entities: [NiCl (H O) ],
2 2 4
[CoCl(NH ) ]2+ and [Fe(CN) ]3– are Ni2+, Co3+ and Fe3+, respectively.
3 5 6
These central atoms/ions are also referred to as Lewis acids.
(c) Ligands
The ions or molecules bound to the central atom/ion in the
coordination entity are called ligands. These may be simple ions
such as Cl–, small molecules such as H O or NH , larger molecules
2 3
such as H NCH CH NH or N(CH CH NH ) or even macromolecules,
2 2 2 2 2 2 23
such as proteins.
When a ligand is bound to a metal ion through a single donor
atom, as with Cl–, H O or NH , the ligand is said to be unidentate.
2 3
When a ligand can bind through two donor atoms as in
H NCH CH NH (ethane-1,2-diamine) or C O 2– (oxalate), the
2 2 2 2 2 4
ligand is said to be didentate and when several donor atoms are
present in a single ligand as in N(CH CH NH ) , the ligand is said
2 2 23
to be polydentate. Ethylenediaminetetraacetate ion (EDTA4–) is
an important hexadentate ligand. It can bind through two
nitrogen and four oxygen atoms to a central metal ion.
When a di- or polydentate ligand uses its two or more donor
atoms simultaneously to bind a single metal ion, it is said to be a
chelate ligand. The number of such ligating groups is called the
denticity of the ligand. Such complexes, called chelate complexes
tend to be more stable than similar complexes containing unidentate
ligands. Ligand which has two different donor atoms and either of
the two ligetes in the complex is called ambidentate
ligand. Examples of such ligands are the NO – and
2
SCN– ions. NO – ion can coordinate either through
2
nitrogen or through oxygen to a central metal
atom/ion.
Similarly, SCN– ion can coordinate through the
sulphur or nitrogen atom.
(d) Coordination number
The coordination number (CN) of a metal ion in a complex can be
defined as the number of ligand donor atoms to which the metal is
directly bonded. For example, in the complex ions, [PtCl ]2– and
6
[Ni(NH ) ]2+, the coordination number of Pt and Ni are 6 and 4
3 4
respectively. Similarly, in the complex ions, [Fe(C O ) ]3– and
2 4 3
[Co(en) ]3+, the coordination number of both, Fe and Co, is 6 because
3
C O 2– and en (ethane-1,2-diamine) are didentate ligands.
2 4
121 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24It is important to note here that coordination number of the central
atom/ion is determined only by the number of sigma bonds formed by
the ligand with the central atom/ion. Pi bonds, if formed between the
ligand and the central atom/ion, are not counted for this purpose.
(e) Coordination sphere
The central atom/ion and the ligands attached to it are enclosed in
square bracket and is collectively termed as the coordination
sphere. The ionisable groups are written outside the bracket and
are called counter ions. For example, in the complex K [Fe(CN) ],
4 6
the coordination sphere is [Fe(CN) ]4– and the counter ion is K+.
6
(f) Coordination polyhedron
The spatial arrangement of the ligand atoms which are directly
attached to the central atom/ion defines a coordination
polyhedron about the central atom. The most common
coordination polyhedra are octahedral, square planar and
tetrahedral. For example, [Co(NH ) ]3+ is octahedral, [Ni(CO) ] is
3 6 4
tetrahedral and [PtCl ]2– is square planar. Fig. 5.1 shows the
4
shapes of different coordination polyhedra.
Fig. 5.1:Shapes of different coordination polyhedra. M
represents the central atom/ion and L, a unidentate
ligand.
(g) Oxidation number of central atom
The oxidation number of the central atom in a complex is defined
as the charge it would carry if all the ligands are removed along
with the electron pairs that are shared with the central atom. The
oxidation number is represented by a Roman numeral in parenthesis
following the name of the coordination entity. For example, oxidation
number of copper in [Cu(CN) ]3– is +1 and it is written as Cu(I).
4
(h)Homoleptic and heteroleptic complexes
Complexes in which a metal is bound to only one kind of donor
groups, e.g., [Co(NH ) ]3+, are known as homoleptic. Complexes in
3 6
which a metal is bound to more than one kind of donor groups,
e.g., [Co(NH ) Cl ]+, are known as heteroleptic.
3 4 2
55555.....33333 NNNNNooooommmmmeeeeennnnnccccclllllaaaaatttttuuuuurrrrreeeee Nomenclature is important in Coordination Chemistry because of the
ooooofffff need to have an unambiguous method of describing formulas and
writing systematic names, particularly when dealing with isomers. The
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
formulas and names adopted for coordination entities are based on the
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss recommendations of the International Union of Pure and Applied
Chemistry (IUPAC).
Chemistry 122
Rationalised 2023-245.3.1 Formulas of The formula of a compound is a shorthand tool used to provide basic
Mononuclear information about the constitution of the compound in a concise and
Coordination convenient manner. Mononuclear coordination entities contain a single
Entities central metal atom. The following rules are applied while writing the formulas:
(i) The central atom is listed first.
(ii) The ligands are then listed in alphabetical order. The placement of
a ligand in the list does not depend on its charge.
(iii) Polydentate ligands are also listed alphabetically. In case of
abbreviated ligand, the first letter of the abbreviation is used to
determine the position of the ligand in the alphabetical order.
(iv) The formula for the entire coordination entity, whether charged or
not, is enclosed in square brackets. When ligands are polyatomic,
their formulas are enclosed in parentheses. Ligand abbreviations
are also enclosed in parentheses.
(v) There should be no space between the ligands and the metal
within a coordination sphere.
(vi) When the formula of a charged coordination entity is to be written
Note: The 2004 IUPAC without that of the counter ion, the charge is indicated outside the
draft recommends that
square brackets as a right superscript with the number before the
ligands will be sorted
alphabetically, sign. For example, [Co(CN) 6]3–, [Cr(H 2O) 6]3+, etc.
irrespective of charge. (vii) The charge of the cation(s) is balanced by the charge of the anion(s).
5.3.2 Naming of The names of coordination compounds are derived by following the
Mononuclear principles of additive nomenclature. Thus, the groups that surround the
Coordination central atom must be identified in the name. They are listed as prefixes
Compounds to the name of the central atom along with any appropriate multipliers.
The following rules are used when naming coordination compounds:
(i) The cation is named first in both positively and negatively charged
coordination entities.
(ii) The ligands are named in an alphabetical order before the name of the
central atom/ion. (This procedure is reversed from writing formula).
(iii) Names of the anionic ligands end in –o, those of neutral and cationic
ligands are the same except aqua for H O, ammine for NH , carbonyl
2 3
for CO and nitrosyl for NO. While writing the formula of coordination
entity, these are enclosed in brackets ( ).
(iv) Prefixes mono, di, tri, etc., are used to indicate the number of the
individual ligands in the coordination entity. When the names of
the ligands include a numerical prefix, then the terms, bis, tris,
tetrakis are used, the ligand to which they refer being placed in
parentheses. For example, [NiCl (PPh ) ] is named as
2 3 2
dichloridobis(triphenylphosphine)nickel(II).
(v) Oxidation state of the metal in cation, anion or neutral coordination
entity is indicated by Roman numeral in parenthesis.
(vi) If the complex ion is a cation, the metal is named same as the
element. For example, Co in a complex cation is called cobalt and
Note: The 2004
Pt is called platinum. If the complex ion is an anion, the name of
IUPAC draft
recommends that the metal ends with the suffix – ate. For example, Co in a complex
2
anionic ligands will anion,  CoSCN 

is called cobaltate. For some metals, the Latin
end with–ido so that 4
names are used in the complex anions, e.g., ferrate for Fe.
chloro would become
chlorido, etc.
123 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24(vii) The neutral complex molecule is named similar to that of the
complex cation.
The following examples illustrate the nomenclature for coordination
compounds.
1. [Cr(NH ) (H O) ]Cl is named as:
3 3 2 3 3
triamminetriaquachromium(III) chloride
Explanation: The complex ion is inside the square bracket, which is
a cation. The amine ligands are named before the aqua ligands
according to alphabetical order. Since there are three chloride ions in
the compound, the charge on the complex ion must be +3 (since the
compound is electrically neutral). From the charge on the complex
ion and the charge on the ligands, we can calculate the oxidation
number of the metal. In this example, all the ligands are neutral
molecules. Therefore, the oxidation number of chromium must be
the same as the charge of the complex ion, +3.
2. [Co(H NCH CH NH ) ] (SO ) is named as:
2 2 2 23 2 4 3
tris(ethane-1,2–diamine)cobalt(III) sulphate
Explanation: The sulphate is the counter anion in this molecule.
Since it takes 3 sulphates to bond with two complex cations, the
charge on each complex cation must be +3. Further, ethane-1,2–
Notice how the name diamine is a neutral molecule, so the oxidation number of cobalt
of the metal differs in in the complex ion must be +3. Remember that you never have to
cation and anion even
indicate the number of cations and anions in the name of an
though they contain the
same metal ions. ionic compound.
3. [Ag(NH ) ][Ag(CN) ] is named as:
3 2 2
diamminesilver(I) dicyanidoargentate(I)
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....22222 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds:
(a) Tetraammineaquachloridocobalt(III) chloride
(b) Potassium tetrahydroxidozincate(II)
(c) Potassium trioxalatoaluminate(III)
(d) Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III)
(e) Tetracarbonylnickel(0)
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (a) [Co(NH ) (H O)Cl]Cl (b) K [Zn(OH) ] (c) K [Al(C O ) ]
34 2 2 2 4 3 2 4 3
(d) [CoCl (en) ]+ (e) [Ni(CO) ]
2 2 4
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....33333 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds:
(a) [Pt(NH ) Cl(NO )] (b) K [Cr(C O ) ] (c) [CoCl (en) ]Cl
32 2 3 2 43 2 2
(d) [Co(NH ) (CO )]Cl (e) Hg[Co(SCN) ]
35 3 4
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (a) Diamminechloridonitrito-N-platinum(II)
(b) Potassium trioxalatochromate(III)
(c) Dichloridobis(ethane-1,2-diamine)cobalt(III) chloride
(d) Pentaamminecarbonatocobalt(III) chloride
(e) Mercury (I) tetrathiocyanato-S-cobaltate(III)
Chemistry 124
Rationalised 2023-24IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
5.1 Write the formulas for the following coordination compounds:
(i) Tetraamminediaquacobalt(III) chloride
(ii) Potassium tetracyanidonickelate(II)
(iii) Tris(ethane–1,2–diamine) chromium(III) chloride
(iv) Amminebromidochloridonitrito-N-platinate(II)
(v) Dichloridobis(ethane–1,2–diamine)platinum(IV) nitrate
(vi) Iron(III) hexacyanidoferrate(II)
5.2 Write the IUPAC names of the following coordination compounds:
(i) [Co(NH ) ]Cl (ii) [Co(NH ) Cl]Cl (iii) K [Fe(CN) ]
3 6 3 35 2 3 6
(iv) K [Fe(C O ) ] (v) K [PdCl ] (vi) [Pt(NH ) Cl(NH CH )]Cl
3 2 4 3 2 4 32 2 3
55555.....44444 IIIIIsssssooooommmmmeeeeerrrrriiiiisssssmmmmm iiiiinnnnn Isomers are two or more compounds that have the same chemical
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn formula but a different arrangement of atoms. Because of the different
arrangement of atoms, they differ in one or more physical or chemical
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
properties. Two principal types of isomerism are known among
coordination compounds. Each of which can be further subdivided.
(a) Stereoisomerism
(i) Geometrical isomerism (ii) Optical isomerism
(b) Structural isomerism
(i) Linkage isomerism (ii) Coordination isomerism
(iii) Ionisation isomerism (iv) Solvate isomerism
Stereoisomers have the same chemical formula and chemical
bonds but they have different spatial arrangement. Structural isomers
have different bonds. A detailed account of these isomers are
given below.
5.4.1 Geometric Isomerism This type of isomerism arises in heteroleptic
complexes due to different possible geometric
arrangements of the ligands. Important examples
of this behaviour are found with coordination
numbers 4 and 6. In a square planar complex of
formula [MX L ] (X and L are unidentate), the
2 2
two ligands X may be arranged adjacent to each
Fig. 5.2: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans) other in a cis isomer, or opposite to each other
of Pt[NH ) Cl ]
32 2 in a trans isomer as depicted in Fig. 5.2.
+ +
Other square planar complex of the type
Cl Cl
MABXL (where A, B, X, L are unidentates)
NH 3 Cl NH 3 NH 3 shows three isomers-two cis and one trans.
Co Co
You may attempt to draw these structures.
NH NH NH NH
3 3 3 3 Such isomerism is not possible for a tetrahedral
NH Cl geometry but similar behaviour is possible in
3
cis trans octahedral complexes of formula [MX L ] in
2 4
which the two ligands X may be oriented cis or
Fig. 5.3: Geometrical isomers (cis and trans)
trans to each other (Fig. 5.3).
of [Co(NH ) Cl ]+
34 2
125 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24This type of isomerism also
arises when didentate ligands
L–L [e.g., NH CH CH NH (en)]
2 2 2 2
are present in complexes of formula
[MX (L–L) ] (Fig. 5.4).
2 2
Another type of geometrical
isomerism occurs in octahedral
Fig. 5.4:Geometrical isomers (cis and trans)
coordination entities of the type
of [CoCl (en) ]
2 2 [Ma b ] like [Co(NH ) (NO ) ]. If
3 3 3 3 2 3
three donor atoms of the same
ligands occupy adjacent positions
at the corners of an octahedral
face, we have the facial (fac)
Fig. 5.5
The facial (fac) and isomer. When the positions are
meridional (mer) around the meridian of the
isomers of octahedron, we get the meridional
[Co(NH ) (NO ) ] (mer) isomer (Fig. 5.5).
3 3 2 3
Why is geometrical isomerism not possible in tetrahedral complexes EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....44444
having two different types of unidentate ligands coordinated with
the central metal ion ?
Tetrahedral complexes do not show geometrical isomerism because SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
the relative positions of the unidentate ligands attached to the central
metal atom are the same with respect to each other.
5.4.2 Optical Isomerism Optical isomers are mirror images that
cannot be superimposed on one
another. These are called as
enantiomers. The molecules or ions
that cannot be superimposed are
called chiral. The two forms are called
dextro (d) and laevo (l) depending
upon the direction they rotate the
plane of polarised light in a
polarimeter (d rotates to the right, l to
the left). Optical isomerism is common
in octahedral complexes involving
Fig.5.6: Optical isomers (d and l) of [Co(en) ] 3+ didentate ligands (Fig. 5.6).
3
In a coordination
entity of the type
[PtCl (en) ]2+, only the
2 2
cis-isomer shows optical
activity (Fig. 5.7).
Fig.5.7
Optical isomers
(d and l) of cis-
[PtCl (en) ]2+
2 2
Chemistry 126
Rationalised 2023-24EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....55555 Draw structures of geometrical isomers of [Fe(NH ) (CN) ]–
3 2 4
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....66666
Out of the following two coordination entities which is chiral
(optically active)?
(a) cis-[CrCl (ox) ]3– (b) trans-[CrCl (ox) ]3–
2 2 2 2
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn The two entities are represented as
Out of the two, (a) cis - [CrCl (ox) ]3- is chiral (optically active).
2 2
5.4.3 Linkage Linkage isomerism arises in a coordination compound containing
Isomerism ambidentate ligand. A simple example is provided by complexes
containing the thiocyanate ligand, NCS–, which may bind through the
nitrogen to give M–NCS or through sulphur to give M–SCN. Jørgensen
discovered such behaviour in the complex [Co(NH ) (NO )]Cl , which is
3 5 2 2
obtained as the red form, in which the nitrite ligandis bound through
oxygen (–ONO), and as the yellow form, in which the nitrite ligand is
bound through nitrogen (–NO ).
2
5.4.4 Coordination This type of isomerism arises from the interchange of ligands between
Isomerism cationic and anionic entities of different metal ions present in a complex.
An example is provided by [Co(NH ) ][Cr(CN) ], in which the NH ligands
36 6 3
are bound to Co3+ and the CN– ligands to Cr3+. In its coordination
isomer [Cr(NH ) ][Co(CN) ], the NH ligands are bound to Cr3+ and the
3 6 6 3
CN– ligands to Co3+.
5.4.5 Ionisation This form of isomerism arises when the counter ion in a complex salt
Isomerism is itself a potential ligand and can displace a ligand which can then
become the counter ion. An example is provided by the ionisation
isomers [Co(NH ) (SO )]Br and [Co(NH ) Br]SO .
3 5 4 35 4
127 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-245.4.6 Solvate This form of isomerism is known as ‘hydrate isomerism’ in case where
Isomerism water is involved as a solvent. This is similar to ionisation isomerism.
Solvate isomers differ by whether or not a solvent molecule is directly
bonded to the metal ion or merely present as free solvent moleculesin
the crystal lattice. An example is provided by the aqua
complex [Cr(H O) ]Cl (violet) and its solvate isomer [Cr(H O) Cl]Cl .H O
2 6 3 2 5 2 2
(grey-green).
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
5.3 Indicate the types of isomerism exhibited by the following complexes and
draw the structures for these isomers:
(i) K[Cr(H O) (C O ) (ii) [Co(en) ]Cl
2 2 2 42 3 3
(iii) [Co(NH ) (NO )](NO ) (iv) [Pt(NH )(H O)Cl ]
35 2 32 3 2 2
5.4 Give evidence that [Co(NH ) Cl]SO and [Co(NH ) (SO )]Cl are ionisation
3 5 4 3 5 4
isomers.
55555.....55555 BBBBBooooonnnnndddddiiiiinnnnnggggg iiiiinnnnn Werner was the first to describe the bonding features in coordination
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn compounds. But his theory could not answer basic questions like:
(i) Why only certain elements possess the remarkable property of
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
forming coordination compounds?
(ii) Why the bonds in coordination compounds have directional
properties?
(iii) Why coordination compounds have characteristic magnetic and
optical properties?
Many approaches have been put forth to explain the nature of
bonding in coordination compounds viz. Valence Bond Theory (VBT),
Crystal Field Theory (CFT), Ligand Field Theory (LFT) and Molecular
Orbital Theory (MOT). We shall focus our attention on elementary
treatment of the application of VBT and CFT to coordination compounds.
5.5.1 Valence According to this theory, the metal atom or ion under the influence of
Bond ligands can use its (n-1)d, ns, np or ns, np, nd orbitals for hybridisation
Theory to yield a set of equivalent orbitals of definite geometry such as octahedral,
tetrahedral, square planar and so on (Table 5.2). These hybridised orbitals
are allowed to overlap with ligand orbitals that can donate electron pairs
for bonding. This is illustrated by the following examples.
Table 5.2: Number of Orbitals and Types of Hybridisations
Coordination Type of Distribution of hybrid
number hybridisation orbitals in space
4 sp3 Tetrahedral
4 dsp2 Square planar
5 sp3d Trigonal bipyramidal
6 sp3d2 Octahedral
6 d2sp3 Octahedral
Chemistry 128
Rationalised 2023-24It is usually possible to predict the geometry of a complex from
the knowledge of its
magnetic behaviour on
the basis of the valence
bond theory.
In the diamagnetic
octahedral complex,
[Co(NH ) ]3+, the cobalt ion
3 6
is in +3 oxidation state
and has the electronic
configuration 3d6. The
hybridisation scheme is as
shown in diagram.
Six pairs of electrons, one from each NH molecule, occupy the six
3
hybrid orbitals. Thus, the complex has octahedral geometry and is
diamagnetic because of the absence of unpaired electron. In the formation
of this complex, since the inner d orbital (3d) is used in hybridisation,
the complex, [Co(NH ) ]3+ is called an inner orbital or low spin or spin
3 6
paired complex. The paramagnetic octahedral complex, [CoF ]3– uses
6
outer orbital (4d ) in hybridisation (sp3d2). It is thus called outer orbital
or high spin or spin free complex. Thus:
Orbitals of Co3+ion
3d 4s 4p 4d
sp3d2hybridised
orbitals of Co3+
3d sp3d3 hybrid
[CoF]3–
6
(outer orbital or
high spin complex)
3d Six pairs of electrons
from six F–ions
In tetrahedral complexes
one s and three p orbitals
are hybridised to form four
equivalent orbitals oriented
tetrahedrally. This is ill-
ustrated below for [NiCl ]2-.
4
Here nickel is in +2
oxidation state and the ion
has the electronic
configuration 3d8. The
hybridisation scheme is as
shown in diagram.
Each Cl– ion donates a pair of electrons. The compound is
paramagnetic since it contains two unpaired electrons. Similarly,
[Ni(CO) ] has tetrahedral geometry but is diamagnetic since nickel is in
4
zero oxidation state and contains no unpaired electron.
129 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24In the square planar complexes, the hybridisation involved is dsp2.
An example is [Ni(CN) ]2–. Here nickel is in +2 oxidation state and has
4
the electronic configuration 3d8. The hybridisation scheme is as shown
in diagram:
Orbitals of Ni2+ion
3d 4s 4p
dsp2hybridised
orbitals of Ni2+
3d dsp2 hydrid 4p
[Ni(CN)]2–
4
(low spin complex)
3d Four pairs of electrons 4p
from 4 CN–groups
Each of the hybridised orbitals receives a pair of electrons from a
cyanide ion. The compound is diamagnetic as evident from the absence
of unpaired electron.
It is important to note that the hybrid orbitals do not actually exist.
In fact, hybridisation is a mathematical manipulation of wave equation
for the atomic orbitals involved.
5.5.2 Magnetic The magnetic moment of coordination compounds can be measured
Properties by the magnetic susceptibility experiments. The results can be used to
of obtain information about the number of unpaired electrons and hence
Coordination structures adopted by metal complexes.
Compounds A critical study of the magnetic data of coordination compounds of
metals of the first transition series reveals some complications. For
metal ions with upto three electrons in the d orbitals, like Ti3+ (d1); V3+
(d2); Cr3+ (d3); two vacant d orbitals are available for octahedral
hybridisation with 4s and 4p orbitals. The magnetic behaviour of these
free ions and their coordination entities is similar. When more than
three 3d electrons are present, the required pair of 3d orbitals for
octahedral hybridisation is not directly available (as a consequence of
Hund’s rule). Thus, for d4 (Cr2+, Mn3+), d5 (Mn2+, Fe3+), d6 (Fe2+, Co3+)
cases, a vacant pair of d orbitals results only by pairing of 3d electrons
which leaves two, one and zero unpaired electrons, respectively.
The magnetic data agree with maximum spin pairing in many cases,
especially with coordination compounds containing d6 ions. However,
with species containing d4 and d5 ions there are complications. [Mn(CN) ]3–
6
has magnetic moment of two unpaired electrons while [MnCl ]3– has a
6
paramagnetic moment of four unpaired electrons. [Fe(CN) ]3– has magnetic
6
moment of a single unpaired electron while [FeF ]3– has a paramagnetic
6
moment of five unpaired electrons. [CoF ]3– is paramagnetic with four
6
unpaired electrons while [Co(C O ) ]3– is diamagnetic. This apparent
2 43
anomaly is explained by valence bond theory in terms of formation of
inner orbital and outer orbital coordination entities. [Mn(CN) ]3–, [Fe(CN) ]3–
6 6
and [Co(C O ) ]3– are inner orbital complexes involving d2sp3 hybridisation,
2 43
the former two complexes are paramagnetic and the latter diamagnetic.
On the other hand, [MnCl ]3–, [FeF ]3– and [CoF ]3– are outer orbital
6 6 6-
complexes involving sp3d2 hybridisation and are paramagnetic
corresponding to four, five and four unpaired electrons.
Chemistry 130
Rationalised 2023-24EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 55555.....77777 The spin only magnetic moment of [MnBr ]2– is 5.9 BM. Predict the
4
geometry of the complex ion ?
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Since the coordination number of Mn2+ ion in the complex ion is 4, it
will be either tetrahedral (sp3 hybridisation) or square planar (dsp2
hybridisation). But the fact that the magnetic moment of the complex
ion is 5.9 BM, it should be tetrahedral in shape rather than square
planar because of the presence of five unpaired electrons in the d orbitals.
5.5.3 Limitations While the VB theory, to a larger extent, explains the formation, structures
of Valence and magnetic behaviour of coordination compounds, it suffers from
Bond the following shortcomings:
Theory (i) It involves a number of assumptions.
(ii) It does not give quantitative interpretation of magnetic data.
(iii) It does not explain the colour exhibited by coordination compounds.
(iv) It does not give a quantitative interpretation of the thermodynamic
or kinetic stabilities of coordination compounds.
(v) It does not make exact predictions regarding the tetrahedral and
square planar structures of 4-coordinate complexes.
(vi) It does not distinguish between weak and strong ligands.
5.5.4 Crystal The crystal field theory (CFT) is an electrostatic model which considers
Field the metal-ligand bond to be ionic arising purely from electrostatic
Theory interactions between the metal ion and the ligand. Ligands are treated
as point charges in case of anions or point dipoles in case of neutral
molecules. The five d orbitals in an isolated gaseous metal atom/ion
have same energy, i.e., they are degenerate. This degeneracy is
maintained if a spherically symmetrical field of negative charges
surrounds the metal atom/ion. However, when this negative field is
due to ligands (either anions or the negative ends of dipolar molecules
like NH and H O) in a complex, it becomes asymmetrical and the
3 2
degeneracy of the d orbitals is lifted. It results in splitting of the d
orbitals. The pattern of splitting depends upon the nature of the crystal
field. Let us explain this splitting in different crystal fields.
(a) Crystal field splitting in octahedral coordination entities
In an octahedral coordination entity with six ligands surrounding
the metal atom/ion, there will be repulsion between the electrons in
metal d orbitals and the electrons (or negative charges) of the ligands.
Such a repulsion is more when the metal d orbital is directed towards
the ligand than when it is away from the ligand. Thus, the d
x2y2
andd orbitals which point towards the axes along the direction of
z2
the ligand will experience more repulsion and will be raised in
energy; and the d , d and d orbitals which are directed between
xy yz xz
the axes will be lowered in energy relative to the average energy in
the spherical crystal field. Thus, the degeneracy of the d orbitals
has been removed due to ligand electron-metal electron repulsions
in the octahedral complex to yield three orbitals of lower energy, t
2g
set and two orbitals of higher energy, e set. This splitting of the
g
131 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24degenerate levels due to the
presence of ligands in a
definite geometry is termed as
crystal field splitting and
the energy separation is
denoted by D (the subscript
o
o is for octahedral) (Fig.5.8).
Thus, the energy of the two e
g
orbitals will increase by (3/5)
D and that of the three t will
o 2g
decrease by (2/5)D .
o
The crystal field splitting,
D , depends upon the field
o
produced by the ligand and
charge on the metal ion. Some
ligands are able to produce
strong fields in which case, the
splitting will be large whereas
others produce weak fields
Fig.5.8: d orbital splitting in an octahedral crystal field
and consequently result in
small splitting of d orbitals.
In general, ligands can be arranged in a series in the order of increasing
field strength as given below:
I– < Br– < SCN– < Cl– < S2– < F– < OH– < C O 2– < H O < NCS–
2 4 2
< edta4– < NH < en < CN– < CO
3
Such a series is termed as spectrochemical series. It is an
experimentally determined series based on the absorption of light
by complexes with different ligands. Let us assign electrons in the d
orbitals of metal ion in octahedral coordination entities. Obviously,
the single d electron occupies one of the lower energy t orbitals. In
2g
d2 and d3 coordination entities, the d electrons occupy the t orbitals
2g
singly in accordance with the Hund’s rule. For d4 ions, two possible
patterns of electron distribution arise: (i) the fourth electron could
either enter the t level and pair with an existing electron, or (ii) it
2g
could avoid paying the price of the pairing energy by occupying the
e level. Which of these possibilities occurs, depends on the relative
g
magnitude of the crystal field splitting, D and the pairing energy, P
o
(P represents the energy required for electron pairing in a single
orbital). The two options are:
(i) If D < P, the fourth electron enters one of the e orbitals giving the
o g
configuration t3 e1. Ligands for which D < P are known as weak
2g g o
field ligands and form high spin complexes.
(ii) If D > P, it becomes more energetically favourable for the fourth
o
electron to occupy a t orbital with configuration t 4e 0. Ligands
2g 2g g
which produce this effect are known as strong field ligands and
form low spin complexes.
Calculations show that d4 to d7 coordination entities are more
stable for strong field as compared to weak field cases.
Chemistry 132
Rationalised 2023-24(b) Crystal field splitting in tetrahedral coordination entities
In tetrahedral coordination entity formation,
the d orbital splitting (Fig. 5.9) is inverted
and is smaller as compared to the octahedral
field splitting. For the same metal, the same
ligands and metal-ligand distances, it can
be shown that D = (4/9) D . Consequently,
t 0
the orbital splitting energies are not
sufficiently large for forcing pairing and,
therefore, low spin configurations are rarely
observed. The ‘g’ subscript is used for the
octahedral and square planar complexes
which have centre of symmetry. Since
Fig.5.9: d orbital splitting in a tetrahedral
tetrahedral complexes lack symmetry, ‘g’
crystal field.
subscript is not used with energy levels.
5.5.5 Colour in In the previous Unit, we learnt that one of the most distinctive
Coordination properties of transition metal complexes is their wide range of colours.
Compounds This means that some of the visible spectrum is being removed from
white light as it passes through the sample, so the light that emerges
is no longer white. The colour of the complex is complementary to
that which is absorbed. The complementary colour is the colour
generated from the wavelength left over; if green light is absorbed by
the complex, it appears red. Table 5.3 gives the relationship of the
different wavelength absorbed and the colour observed.
Table 5.3:Relationship between the Wavelength of Light absorbed and the
Colour observed in some Coordination Entities
Coordinaton Wavelength of light Colour of light Colour of coordination
entity absorbed (nm) absorbed entity
[CoCl(NH ) ]2+ 535 Yellow Violet
3 5
[Co(NH ) (H O)]3+ 500 Blue Green Red
35 2
[Co(NH ) ]3+ 475 Blue Yellow Orange
36
[Co(CN) ]3– 310 Ultraviolet Not in visible Pale Yellow
6 region
[Cu(H O) ]2+ 600 Red Blue
2 4
[Ti(H O) ]3+ 498 Blue Green Violet
2 6
The colour in the coordination compounds can be readily explained
in terms of the crystal field theory. Consider, for example, the complex
[Ti(H O) ]3+, which is violet in colour. This is an octahedral complex
2 6
where the single electron (Ti3+ is a 3d1 system) in the metal d orbital is
in the t level in the ground state of the complex. The next higher state
2g
available for the electron is the empty e level. If light corresponding to
g
the energy of blue-green region is absorbed by the complex, it would
excite the electron from t level to the e level (t 1e 0 fi t 0e 1).
2g g 2g g 2g g
Consequently, the complex appears violet in colour (Fig. 5.10). The
crystal field theory attributes the colour of the coordination compounds
to d-d transition of the electron.
133 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24It is important to note that
in the absence of ligand,
crystal field splitting does
not occur and hence the
substance is colourless. For
example, removal of water
from [Ti(H O) ]Cl on heating
2 6 3
renders it colourless.
Similarly, anhydrous CuSO
4
is white, but CuSO .5H O is
4 2
Fig.5.10: Transition of an electron in blue in colour. The influence
of the ligand on the colour
of a complex may be illustrated by considering the [Ni(H O) ]2+ complex,
2 6
which forms when nickel(II) chloride is dissolved in water. If the
didentate ligand, ethane-1,2-diamine(en) is progressively added in the
molar ratios en:Ni, 1:1, 2:1, 3:1, the following series of reactions and
their associated colour changes occur:
[Ni(H O) ]2+ (aq) + en (aq) = [Ni(H O) (en)]2+(aq) + 2H O
2 6 2 4 2
green pale blue
[Ni(H O) (en)]2+(aq) + en (aq) = [Ni(H O) (en) ]2+(aq) + 2H O
2 4 2 2 2 2
blue/purple
[Ni(H O) (en) ]2+(aq) + en (aq) = [Ni(en) ]2+(aq) + 2H O
2 2 2 3 2
violet
This sequence is shown in Fig. 5.11.
Fig.5.11
Aqueous solutions of
complexes of
nickel(II) with an
[Ni(H O) ]2+ (aq) [Ni(en) ]2+ (aq)
increasing number 2 6 3
of ethane-1,
2-diamine ligands. [Ni(H O) en]2+ (aq) [Ni(H O) en ]2+ (aq)
2 4 2 4 2
Colour of Some Gem Stones
The colours produced by electronic transitions within the d orbitals of a
transition metal ion occur frequently in everyday life. Ruby [Fig.5.12(a)] is
aluminium oxide (Al O ) containing about 0.5-1% Cr3+ ions (d3), which are
2 3
randomly distributed in positions normally occupied by Al3+. We may view
these chromium(III) species as octahedral chromium(III) complexes incorporated
into the alumina lattice; d–d transitions at these centres give rise to the colour.
Chemistry 134
Rationalised 2023-24In emerald [Fig.5.12(b)], Cr3+
ions occupy octahedral sites
in the mineral beryl
(Be Al Si O ). The absorption
3 2 6 18
bands seen in the ruby shift (a) (b)
to longer wavelength, namely
yellow-red and blue, causing Fig.5.12: (a) Ruby: this gemstone was found in
marble from Mogok, Myanmar; (b)
emerald to transmit light in
Emerald: this gemstone was found in
the green region.
Muzo, Columbia.
5.5.6 Limitations The crystal field model is successful in explaining the formation,
of Crystal structures, colour and magnetic properties of coordination compounds
Field to a large extent. However, from the assumptions that the ligands are
Theory point charges, it follows that anionic ligands should exert the greatest
splitting effect. The anionic ligands actually are found at the low end
of the spectrochemical series. Further, it does not take into account
the covalent character of bonding between the ligand and the central
atom. These are some of the weaknesses of CFT, which are explained
by ligand field theory (LFT) and molecular orbital theory which are
beyond the scope of the present study.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
5.5 Explain on the basis of valence bond theory that [Ni(CN) ]2– ion with square
4
planar structure is diamagnetic and the [NiCl ]2– ion with tetrahedral
4
geometry is paramagnetic.
5.6 [NiCl ]2– is paramagnetic while [Ni(CO) ] is diamagnetic though both are
4 4
tetrahedral. Why?
5.7 [Fe(H O) ]3+ is strongly paramagnetic whereas [Fe(CN) ]3– is weakly
2 6 6
paramagnetic. Explain.
5.8 Explain [Co(NH ) ]3+ is an inner orbital complex whereas [Ni(NH ) ]2+ is an
3 6 3 6
outer orbital complex.
5.9 Predict the number of unpaired electrons in the square planar [Pt(CN) ]2– ion.
4
5.10 The hexaquo manganese(II) ion contains five unpaired electrons, while the
hexacyanoion contains only one unpaired electron. Explain using Crystal
Field Theory.
55555.....66666 BBBBBooooonnnnndddddiiiiinnnnnggggg iiiiinnnnn The homoleptic carbonyls (compounds containing carbonyl ligands
MMMMMeeeeetttttaaaaalllll only) are formed by most of the transition metals. These carbonyls
have simple, well defined structures. Tetracarbonylnickel(0) is
CCCCCaaaaarrrrrbbbbbooooonnnnnyyyyylllllsssss
tetrahedral, pentacarbonyliron(0) is trigonalbipyramidal while
hexacarbonyl chromium(0) is octahedral.
Decacarbonyldimanganese(0) is made up of two square pyramidal
Mn(CO) units joined by a Mn – Mn bond. Octacarbonyldicobalt(0)
5
has a Co – Co bond bridged by two CO groups (Fig.5.13).
135 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24CO CO
OC
Ni Fe CO
OC CO OC
CO CO O
Ni(CO) Fe(CO) OC C CO
4 5
Tetrahedral Trigonal bipyramidal OC Co Co CO
OC CO
C
CO CO CO
CO CO CO CO O
Fig. 5.13 Cr OC Mn Mn CO [Co 2(CO) 8]
Structures of some
representative CO CO CO CO
CO CO CO
homoleptic metal
carbonyls. Cr(CO) Octahedral [Mn (CO) ]
6 2 10
The metal-carbon bond in metal carbonyls
possess both s and p character. The M–C s bond
is formed by the donation of lone pair of electrons
on the carbonyl carbon into a vacant orbital of
the metal. The M–C p bond is formed by the
donation of a pair of electrons from a filled d orbital
of metal into the vacant antibonding p* orbital of
carbon monoxide. The metal to ligand bonding
Fig. 5.14:Example of synergic bonding creates a synergic effect which strengthens the
interactions in a carbonyl bond between CO and the metal (Fig.5.14).
complex.
55555.....77777 IIIIImmmmmpppppooooorrrrrtttttaaaaannnnnccccceeeee The coordination compounds are of great importance. These compounds
aaaaannnnnddddd are widely present in the mineral, plant and animal worlds and are
known to play many important functions in the area of analytical
AAAAAppppppppppllllliiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
chemistry, metallurgy, biological systems, industry and medicine. These
ooooofffff are described below:
CCCCCoooooooooorrrrrdddddiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn • Coordination compounds find use in many qualitative and
quantitative chemical analysis. The familiar colour reactions given
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
by metal ions with a number of ligands (especially chelating ligands),
as a result of formation of coordination entities, form the basis for
their detection and estimation by classical and instrumental methods
of analysis. Examples of such reagents include EDTA, DMG
(dimethylglyoxime), a–nitroso–b–naphthol, cupron, etc.
• Hardness of water is estimated by simple titration with Na EDTA.
2
The Ca2+ and Mg2+ ions form stable complexes with EDTA. The
selective estimation of these ions can be done due to difference in
the stability constants of calcium and magnesium complexes.
• Some important extraction processes of metals, like those of silver and
gold, make use of complex formation. Gold, for example, combines with
cyanide in the presence of oxygen and water to form the coordination
entity [Au(CN) ]– in aqueous solution. Gold can be separated in metallic
2
form from this solution by the addition of zinc.
• Similarly, purification of metals can be achieved through formation
and subsequent decomposition of their coordination compounds.
Chemistry 136
Rationalised 2023-24For example, impure nickel is converted to [Ni(CO) ], which is
4
decomposed to yield pure nickel.
• Coordination compounds are of great importance in biological
systems. The pigment responsible for photosynthesis, chlorophyll,
is a coordination compound of magnesium. Haemoglobin, the red
pigment of blood which acts as oxygen carrier is a coordination
compound of iron. Vitamin B , cyanocobalamine, the anti–
12
pernicious anaemia factor, is a coordination compound of cobalt.
Among the other compounds of biological importance with
coordinated metal ions are the enzymes like, carboxypeptidase A
and carbonic anhydrase (catalysts of biological systems).
• Coordination compounds are used as catalysts for many industrial
processes. Examples include rhodium complex, [(Ph P) RhCl], a
3 3
Wilkinson catalyst, is used for the hydrogenation of alkenes.
• Articles can be electroplated with silver and gold much more
smoothly and evenly from solutions of the complexes, [Ag(CN) ]–
2
and [Au(CN) ]– than from a solution of simple metal ions.
2
• In black and white photography, the developed film is fixed by
washing with hypo solution which dissolves the undecomposed
AgBr to form a complex ion, [Ag(S O ) ]3–.
2 3 2
• There is growing interest in the use of chelate therapy in medicinal
chemistry. An example is the treatment of problems caused by the
presence of metals in toxic proportions in plant/animal systems.
Thus, excess of copper and iron are removed by the chelating ligands
D–penicillamine and desferrioxime B via the formation of coordination
compounds. EDTA is used in the treatment of lead poisoning. Some
coordination compounds of platinum effectively inhibit the growth
of tumours. Examples are: cis–platin and related compounds.
SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy
The chemistry of coordination compounds is an important and challenging
area of modern inorganic chemistry. During the last fifty years, advances in this
area, have provided development of new concepts and models of bonding and
molecular structure, novel breakthroughs in chemical industry and vital
insights into the functioning of critical components of biological systems.
The first systematic attempt at explaining the formation, reactions, structure
and bonding of a coordination compound was made by A. Werner. His theory
postulated the use of two types of linkages (primary and secondary) by a
metal atom/ion in a coordination compound. In the modern language of chemistry
these linkages are recognised as the ionisable (ionic) and non-ionisable (covalent)
bonds, respectively. Using the property of isomerism, Werner predicted the
geometrical shapes of a large number of coordination entities.
The Valence Bond Theory (VBT) explains with reasonable success, the
formation, magnetic behaviour and geometrical shapes of coordination compounds.
It, however, fails to provide a quantitative interpretation of magnetic behaviour
and has nothing to say about the optical properties of these compounds.
The Crystal Field Theory (CFT) to coordination compounds is based on
the effect of different crystal fields (provided by the ligands taken as point charges),
137 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-24on the degeneracy of d orbital energies of the central metal atom/ion. The
splitting of the d orbitals provides different electronic arrangements in strong
and weak crystal fields. The treatment provides for quantitative estimations of
orbital separation energies, magnetic moments and spectral and stability
parameters. However, the assumption that ligands consititute point charges
creates many theoretical difficulties.
The metal–carbon bond in metal carbonyls possesses both s and p character.
The ligand to metal is s bond and metal to ligand is p bond. This unique synergic
bonding provides stability to metal carbonyls.
Coordination compounds are of great importance. These compounds provide
critical insights into the functioning and structures of vital components of
biological systems. Coordination compounds also find extensive applications in
metallurgical processes, analytical and medicinal chemistry.
Exercises
5.1 Explain the bonding in coordination compounds in terms of Werner’s postulates.
5.2 FeSO solution mixed with (NH ) SO solution in 1:1 molar ratio gives the
4 4 2 4
test of Fe2+ ion but CuSO solution mixed with aqueous ammonia in 1:4
4
molar ratio does not give the test of Cu2+ ion. Explain why?
5.3 Explain with two examples each of the following: coordination entity, ligand,
coordination number, coordination polyhedron, homoleptic and heteroleptic.
5.4 What is meant by unidentate, didentate and ambidentate ligands? Give two
examples for each.
5.5 Specify the oxidation numbers of the metals in the following coordination entities:
(i) [Co(H O)(CN)(en) ]2+ (iii) [PtCl ]2– (v) [Cr(NH ) Cl ]
2 2 4 3 3 3
(ii) [CoBr (en) ]+ (iv) K [Fe(CN) ]
2 2 3 6
5.6 Using IUPAC norms write the formulas for the following:
(i) Tetrahydroxidozincate(II) (vi) Hexaamminecobalt(III) sulphate
(ii) Potassium tetrachloridopalladate(II) (vii) Potassium tri(oxalato)chromate(III)
(iii) Diamminedichloridoplatinum(II) (viii) Hexaammineplatinum(IV)
(iv) Potassium tetracyanidonickelate(II) (ix) Tetrabromidocuprate(II)
(v) Pentaamminenitrito-O-cobalt(III) (x) Pentaamminenitrito-N-cobalt(III)
5.7 Using IUPAC norms write the systematic names of the following:
(i) [Co(NH ) ]Cl (iv) [Co(NH ) Cl(NO )]Cl (vii) [Ni(NH ) ]Cl
3 6 3 3 4 2 3 6 2
(ii) [Pt(NH ) Cl(NH CH )]Cl (v) [Mn(H O) ]2+ (viii) [Co(en) ]3+
3 2 2 3 2 6 3
(iii) [Ti(H O) ]3+ (vi) [NiCl ]2– (ix) [Ni(CO) ]
2 6 4 4
5.8 List various types of isomerism possible for coordination compounds, giving
an example of each.
5.9 How many geometrical isomers are possible in the following coordination entities?
(i) [Cr(C O ) ]3– (ii) [Co(NH ) Cl ]
2 43 33 3
5.10 Draw the structures of optical isomers of:
(i) [Cr(C O ) ]3– (ii) [PtCl (en) ]2+ (iii) [Cr(NH ) Cl (en)]+
2 43 2 2 3 2 2
Chemistry 138
Rationalised 2023-245.11 Draw all the isomers (geometrical and optical) of:
(i) [CoCl (en) ]+ (ii) [Co(NH )Cl(en) ]2+ (iii) [Co(NH ) Cl (en)]+
2 2 3 2 3 2 2
5.12 Write all the geometrical isomers of [Pt(NH )(Br)(Cl)(py)] and how many of
3
these will exhibit optical isomers?
5.13 Aqueous copper sulphate solution (blue in colour) gives:
(i) a green precipitate with aqueous potassium fluoride and
(ii) a bright green solution with aqueous potassium chloride. Explain these
experimental results.
5.14 What is the coordination entity formed when excess of aqueous KCN is
added to an aqueous solution of copper sulphate? Why is it that no precipitate
of copper sulphide is obtained when H S(g) is passed through this solution?
2
5.15 Discuss the nature of bonding in the following coordination entities on the
basis of valence bond theory:
(i) [Fe(CN) ]4– (ii) [FeF ]3– (iii) [Co(C O ) ]3– (iv) [CoF ]3–
6 6 2 43 6
5.16 Draw figure to show the splitting of d orbitals in an octahedral crystal field.
5.17 What is spectrochemical series? Explain the difference between a weak
field ligand and a strong field ligand.
5.18 What is crystal field splitting energy? How does the magnitude of D decide
o
the actual configuration of d orbitals in a coordination entity?
5.19 [Cr(NH ) ]3+ is paramagnetic while [Ni(CN) ]2– is diamagnetic. Explain why?
36 4
5.20 A solution of [Ni(H O) ]2+ is green but a solution of [Ni(CN) ]2– is colourless.
2 6 4
Explain.
5.21 [Fe(CN) ]4– and [Fe(H O) ]2+ are of different colours in dilute solutions. Why?
6 2 6
5.22 Discuss the nature of bonding in metal carbonyls.
5.23 Give the oxidation state, d orbital occupation and coordination number of
the central metal ion in the following complexes:
(i) K [Co(C O ) ] (iii) (NH ) [CoF ]
3 2 43 42 4
(ii) cis-[CrCl (en) ]Cl (iv) [Mn(H O) ]SO
2 2 2 6 4
5.24 Write down the IUPAC name for each of the following complexes and indicate
the oxidation state, electronic configuration and coordination number. Also
give stereochemistry and magnetic moment of the complex:
(i) K[Cr(H O) (C O ) ].3H O (iii) [CrCl (py) ] (v) K [Mn(CN) ]
2 2 2 42 2 3 3 4 6
(ii) [Co(NH ) Cl]Cl (iv) Cs[FeCl ]
35 - 2 4
5.25 Explain the violet colour of the complex [Ti(H O) ]3+ on the basis of crystal
2 6
field theory.
5.26 What is meant by the chelate effect? Give an example.
5.27 Discuss briefly giving an example in each case the role of coordination
compounds in:
(i) biological systems (iii) analytical chemistry
(ii) medicinal chemistry and (iv) extraction/metallurgy of metals.
5.28 How many ions are produced from the complex Co(NH ) Cl in solution?
3 6 2
(i) 6 (ii) 4 (iii) 3 (iv) 2
139 Coordination Compounds
Rationalised 2023-245.29 Amongst the following ions which one has the highest magnetic moment value?
(i) [Cr(H O) ]3+ (ii) [Fe(H O) ]2+ (iii) [Zn(H O) ]2+
2 6 2 6 2 6
5.30 Amongst the following, the most stable complex is
(i) [Fe(H O) ]3+ (ii) [Fe(NH ) ]3+ (iii) [Fe(C O ) ]3– (iv) [FeCl ]3–
2 6 36 2 43 6
5.31 What will be the correct order for the wavelengths of absorption in the visible
region for the following:
[Ni(NO ) ]4–, [Ni(NH ) ]2+, [Ni(H O) ]2+?
26 36 2 6
Answers to Some Intext Questions
5.1 (i) [Co(NH ) (H O) ]Cl (iv) [Pt(NH )BrCl(NO )]–
34 2 2 3 3 2
(ii) K [Ni(CN) ] (v) [PtCl (en) ](NO )
2 4 2 2 32
(iii) [Cr(en) ]Cl (vi) Fe [Fe(CN) ]
3 3 4 6 3
5.2 (i) Hexaamminecobalt(III) chloride
(ii) Pentaamminechloridocobalt(III) chloride
(iii) Potassium hexacyanidoferrate(III)
(iv) Potassium trioxalatoferrate(III)
(v) Potassium tetrachloridopalladate(II)
(vi) Diamminechlorido(methanamine)platinum(II) chloride
5.3 (i) Both geometrical (cis-, trans-) and optical isomers for cis can exist.
(ii) Two optical isomers can exist.
(iii) There are 10 possible isomers. (Hint: There are geometrical, ionisation and
linkage isomers possible).
(iv) Geometrical (cis-, trans-) isomers can exist.
5.4 The ionisation isomers dissolve in water to yield different ions and thus react
differently to various reagents:
[Co(NH ) Br]SO + Ba2+ fi BaSO (s)
3 5 4 4
[Co(NH ) SO ]Br + Ba2+ fi No reaction
3 5 4
[Co(NH ) Br]SO + Ag+ fi No reaction
3 5 4
[Co(NH ) SO ]Br + Ag+ fi AgBr (s)
3 5 4
5.6 In Ni(CO) , Ni is in zero oxidation state whereas in NiCl 2–, it is in +2 oxidation
4 4
state. In the presence of CO ligand, the unpaired d electrons of Ni pair up but
Cl– being a weak ligand is unable to pair up the unpaired electrons.
5.7 In presence of CN–, (a strong ligand) the 3d electrons pair up leaving only one
unpaired electron. The hybridisation is d2sp3 forming inner orbital complex. In
the presence of H O, (a weak ligand), 3d electrons do not pair up. The
2
hybridisation is sp3d2 forming an outer orbital complex containing five unpaired
electrons, it is strongly paramagnetic.
5.8 In the presence of NH , the 3d electrons pair up leaving two d orbitals empty
3
to be involved in d2sp3 hybridisation forming inner orbital complex in case of [Co(NH)]3+.
36
In Ni(NH ) 2+, Ni is in +2 oxidation state and has d8 configuration, the
3 6
hybridisation involved is sp3d2 forming outer orbital complex.
5.9 For square planar shape, the hybridisation is dsp2. Hence the unpaired electrons
in 5d orbital pair up to make one d orbital empty for dsp2 hybridisation. Thus
there is no unpaired electron.
Chemistry 140
Rationalised 2023-24