Unit 4
CHEMiCAL BOnDinG AnD
MOLECULAR StRUCtURE
Scientists are constantly discovering new compounds,
orderly arranging the facts about them, trying to explain
with the existing knowledge, organising to modify the
earlier views or evolve theories for explaining the newly
After studying this Unit, you will be observed facts.
able to
• understand Kössel-Lewis
approach to chemical bonding;
• explain the octet rule and its Matter is made up of one or different type of elements.
limitations, draw Lewis structures Under normal conditions no other element exists as an
of simple molecules; independent atom in nature, except noble gases. However,
a group of atoms is found to exist together as one species
• explain the formation of different
types of bonds; having characteristic properties. Such a group of atoms
is called a molecule. Obviously there must be some force
• describe the VSEPR theory and
which holds these constituent atoms together in the
predict the geometry of simple
molecules. the attractive force which holds various
molecules;
constituents (atoms, ions, etc.) together in different
• explain the valence bond chemical species is called a chemical bond. Since the
approach for the formation of
formation of chemical compounds takes place as a result of
covalent bonds;
combination of atoms of various elements in different ways,
• predict the directional properties it raises many questions. Why do atoms combine? Why are
of covalent bonds; only certain combinations possible? Why do some atoms
combine while certain others do not? Why do molecules
• explain the different types of
possess definite shapes? To answer such questions different
hybridisation involving s, p and
d orbitals and draw shapes of theories and concepts have been put forward from time
simple covalent molecules; to time. These are Kössel-Lewis approach, Valence Shell
Electron Pair Repulsion (VSEPR) Theory, Valence Bond (VB)
• describe the molecular orbital
Theory and Molecular Orbital (MO) Theory. The evolution
theory of homonuclear diatomic
molecules; of various theories of valence and the interpretation of
the nature of chemical bonds have closely been related to
• explain the concept of hydrogen
the developments in the understanding of the structure
bond.
of atom, the electronic configuration of elements and the
periodic table. Every system tends to be more stable and
bonding is nature’s way of lowering the energy of the system
to attain stability.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 100 9/12/2022 9:36:09 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 101
4.1 KÖSSEL-LEwiS AppROACH tO the number of valence electrons. This number
CHEMiCAL BOnDinG of valence electrons helps to calculate the
common or group valence of the element.
In order to explain the formation of chemical
The group valence of the elements is generally
bond in terms of electrons, a number of
either equal to the number of dots in Lewis
attempts were made, but it was only in
symbols or 8 minus the number of dots or
1916 when Kössel and Lewis succeeded
valence electrons.
independently in giving a satisfactory
explanation. They were the first to provide Kössel, in relation to chemical bonding,
some logical explanation of valence which was drew attention to the following facts:
based on the inertness of noble gases. • In the periodic table, the highly
Lewis pictured the atom in terms of a electronegative halogens and the highly
positively charged ‘Kernel’ (the nucleus plus electropositive alkali metals are separated
by the noble gases;
the inner electrons) and the outer shell that
could accommodate a maximum of eight • The formation of a negative ion from a
electrons. He, further assumed that these halogen atom and a positive ion from
eight electrons occupy the corners of a cube an alkali metal atom is associated with
which surround the ‘Kernel’. Thus the single the gain and loss of an electron by the
outer shell electron of sodium would occupy respective atoms;
one corner of the cube, while in the case of • The negative and positive ions thus
a noble gas all the eight corners would be formed attain stable noble gas electronic
occupied. This octet of electrons, represents configurations. The noble gases (with the
a particularly stable electronic arrangement. exception of helium which has a duplet
Lewis postulated that atoms achieve of electrons) have a particularly stable
the stable octet when they are linked by outer shell configuration of eight (octet)
chemical bonds. In the case of sodium and electrons, ns2np6.
chlorine, this can happen by the transfer of • The negative and positive ions are stabilized
an electron from sodium to chlorine thereby by electrostatic attraction.
giving the Na+ and Cl– ions. In the case of
For example, the formation of NaCl from
other molecules like Cl , H , F , etc., the bond
2 2 2 sodium and chlorine, according to the above
is formed by the sharing of a pair of electrons
scheme, can be explained as:
between the atoms. In the process each atom
attains a stable outer octet of electrons. Na → Na+ + e–
[Ne] 3s1 [Ne]
Lewis Symbols: In the formation of a
molecule, only the outer shell electrons take Cl + e– → Cl–
part in chemical combination and they are [Ne] 3s2 3p5 [Ne] 3s2 3p6 or [Ar]
known as valence electrons. The inner shell
Na+ + Cl– → NaCl or Na+Cl–
electrons are well protected and are generally
Similarly the formation of CaF may be
not involved in the combination process. 2
shown as:
G.N. Lewis, an American chemist introduced
simple notations to represent valence electrons Ca → Ca2+ + 2e–
in an atom. These notations are called Lewis [Ar]4s2 [Ar]
symbols. For example, the Lewis symbols for F + e– → F–
the elements of second period are as under:
[He] 2s2 2p5 [He] 2s2 2p6 or [Ne]
Ca2+ + 2F– → CaF or Ca2+(F– )
2 2
the bond formed, as a result of the
Significance of Lewis Symbols : The electrostatic attraction between the
number of dots around the symbol represents positive and negative ions was termed as
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 101 9/12/2022 9:36:09 AM102 chemistry
the electrovalent bond. the electrovalence chlorine atoms attain the outer shell octet of
is thus equal to the number of unit charge(s) the nearest noble gas (i.e., argon).
on the ion. Thus, calcium is assigned a
the dots represent electrons. Such
positive electrovalence of two, while chlorine
structures are referred to as Lewis dot
a negative electrovalence of one.
structures.
Kössel’s postulations provide the basis for
The Lewis dot structures can be written for
the modern concepts regarding ion-formation
other molecules also, in which the combining
by electron transfer and the formation of ionic
atoms may be identical or different. The
crystalline compounds. His views have proved
important conditions being that:
to be of great value in the understanding and
• Each bond is formed as a result of sharing
systematisation of the ionic compounds. At
of an electron pair between the atoms.
the same time he did recognise the fact that
• Each combining atom contributes at least
a large number of compounds did not fit into
one electron to the shared pair.
these concepts.
• The combining atoms attain the outer-
4.1.1 Octet Rule
shell noble gas configurations as a result
Kössel and Lewis in 1916 developed an of the sharing of electrons.
important theory of chemical combination
• Thus in water and carbon tetrachloride
between atoms known as electronic theory
molecules, formation of covalent bonds
of chemical bonding. According to this,
can be represented as:
atoms can combine either by transfer of
valence electrons from one atom to another
(gaining or losing) or by sharing of valence
electrons in order to have an octet in their
valence shells. This is known as octet rule.
4.1.2 Covalent Bond
Langmuir (1919) refined the Lewis
postulations by abandoning the idea of
the stationary cubical arrangement of the
octet, and by introducing the term covalent
thus, when two atoms share one
bond. The Lewis-Langmuir theory can be
electron pair they are said to be joined by
understood by considering the formation of
a single covalent bond. In many compounds
the chlorine molecule, Cl . The Cl atom with
2 we have multiple bonds between atoms. The
electronic configuration, [Ne]3s2 3p5, is one
formation of multiple bonds envisages sharing
electron short of the argon configuration.
of more than one electron pair between two
The formation of the Cl molecule can be
2 atoms. if two atoms share two pairs of
understood in terms of the sharing of a pair
electrons, the covalent bond between them
of electrons between the two chlorine atoms,
is called a double bond. For example, in the
each chlorine atom contributing one electron
carbon dioxide molecule, we have two double
to the shared pair. In the process both
bonds between the carbon and oxygen atoms.
Similarly in ethene molecule the two carbon
atoms are joined by a double bond.
or Cl – Cl
Double bonds in CO molecule
Covalent bond between two Cl atoms 2
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 102 9/12/2022 9:36:09 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 103
number of valence electrons. For example,
for the CO2– ion, the two negative charges
3
indicate that there are two additional
electrons than those provided by the
neutral atoms. For NH+ ion, one positive
4
charge indicates the loss of one electron
from the group of neutral atoms.
C H molecule
2 4 • Knowing the chemical symbols of the
when combining atoms share three combining atoms and having knowledge
electron pairs as in the case of two nitrogen of the skeletal structure of the compound
atoms in the n molecule and the two (known or guessed intelligently), it is easy
2
carbon atoms in the ethyne molecule, a to distribute the total number of electrons
triple bond is formed. as bonding shared pairs between the
atoms in proportion to the total bonds.
• In general the least electronegative atom
occupies the central position in the
molecule/ion. For example in the NF and
3
N molecule CO2–, nitrogen and carbon are the central
2 3
atoms whereas fluorine and oxygen
occupy the terminal positions.
• After accounting for the shared pairs of
electrons for single bonds, the remaining
C H molecule electron pairs are either utilized for
2 2
multiple bonding or remain as the lone
pairs. The basic requirement being
4.1.3 Lewis Representation of Simple
that each bonded atom gets an octet of
Molecules (the Lewis Structures)
electrons.
the Lewis dot structures provide a picture
Lewis representations of a few molecules/
of bonding in molecules and ions in terms of
ions are given in Table 4.1.
the shared pairs of electrons and the octet
rule. While such a picture may not explain
the bonding and behaviour of a molecule table 4.1 the Lewis Representation of
completely, it does help in understanding the Some Molecules
formation and properties of a molecule to a
large extent. Writing of Lewis dot structures of
molecules is, therefore, very useful. The Lewis
dot structures can be written by adopting the
following steps:
• The total number of electrons required
for writing the structures are obtained
by adding the valence electrons of the
combining atoms. For example, in the CH
4
molecule there are eight valence electrons
available for bonding (4 from carbon and
4 from the four hydrogen atoms).
• For anions, each negative charge would
mean addition of one electron. For cations,
each positive charge would result in * Each H atom attains the configuration of helium
subtraction of one electron from the total (a duplet of electrons)
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 103 9/12/2022 9:36:10 AM104 chemistry
problem 4.1 each of the oxygen atoms completing the
octets on oxygen atoms. This, however,
Write the Lewis dot structure of CO
does not complete the octet on nitrogen
molecule.
if the remaining two electrons constitute
Solution lone pair on it.
Step 1. Count the total number of valence
electrons of carbon and oxygen atoms.
The outer (valence) shell configurations
of carbon and oxygen atoms are: 2s2 2p2 Hence we have to resort to multiple
and 2s2 2p4, respectively. The valence bonding between nitrogen and one of
electrons available are 4 + 6 =10. the oxygen atoms (in this case a double
bond). This leads to the following Lewis
Step 2. The skeletal structure of CO is
dot structures.
written as: C O
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared
electron pair) between C and O and
complete the octet on O, the remaining
two electrons are the lone pair on C.
This does not complete the octet on
carbon and hence we have to resort to
multiple bonding (in this case a triple
4.1.4 Formal Charge
bond) between C and O atoms. This
Lewis dot structures, in general, do not
satisfies the octet rule condition for both
represent the actual shapes of the molecules.
atoms.
In case of polyatomic ions, the net charge is
possessed by the ion as a whole and not by
a particular atom. It is, however, feasible to
assign a formal charge on each atom. The
formal charge of an atom in a polyatomic
molecule or ion may be defined as the
problem 4.2
difference between the number of valence
Write the Lewis structure of the nitrite
electrons of that atom in an isolated or free
ion, NO– .
2 state and the number of electrons assigned
to that atom in the Lewis structure. It is
Solution expressed as :
Step 1. Count the total number of
valence electrons of the nitrogen atom, Formal charge (F.C.)
the oxygen atoms and the additional one on an atom in a Lewis =
negative charge (equal to one electron). structure
N(2s2 2p3), O (2s2 2p4)
5 + (2 × 6) +1 = 18 electrons total number of valence total number of non
electrons in the free — bonding (lone pair)
Step 2. The skeletal structure of NO– is atom electrons
2
written as : O N O
total number of
— (1/2) bonding (shared)
Step 3. Draw a single bond (one shared
electrons
electron pair) between the nitrogen and
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 104 9/12/2022 9:36:10 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 105
The counting is based on the assumption 4.1.5 Limitations of the Octet Rule
that the atom in the molecule owns one The octet rule, though useful, is not universal.
electron of each shared pair and both the It is quite useful for understanding the
electrons of a lone pair. structures of most of the organic compounds
Let us consider the ozone molecule (O ). and it applies mainly to the second period
3
elements of the periodic table. There are three
The Lewis structure of O may be drawn as:
3
types of exceptions to the octet rule.
The incomplete octet of the central atom
In some compounds, the number of electrons
surrounding the central atom is less than
eight. This is especially the case with elements
having less than four valence electrons.
Examples are LiCl, BeH and BCl .
The atoms have been numbered as 1, 2 2 3
and 3. The formal charge on:
• The central O atom marked 1
1 Li, Be and B have 1, 2 and 3 valence electrons
= 6 – 2 – (6) = +1
only. Some other such compounds are AlCl
2 3
and BF .
• The end O atom marked 2 3
Odd-electron molecules
1
= 6 – 4 – (4) = 0 In molecules with an odd number of electrons
2
like nitric oxide, NO and nitrogen dioxide,
• The end O atom marked 3
NO , the octet rule is not satisfied for all the
2
1 atoms
= 6 – 6 – (2) = –1
2
Hence, we represent O along with the
3
formal charges as follows:
The expanded octet
Elements in and beyond the third period of
the periodic table have, apart from 3s and 3p
orbitals, 3d orbitals also available for bonding.
In a number of compounds of these elements
there are more than eight valence electrons
We must understand that formal charges around the central atom. This is termed as
do not indicate real charge separation within the expanded octet. Obviously the octet rule
the molecule. Indicating the charges on the does not apply in such cases.
atoms in the Lewis structure only helps in
Some of the examples of such compounds
keeping track of the valence electrons in
are: PF , SF , H SO and a number of
the molecule. Formal charges help in the 5 6 2 4
coordination compounds.
selection of the lowest energy structure from
a number of possible Lewis structures for a
given species. Generally the lowest energy
structure is the one with the smallest
formal charges on the atoms. the formal
charge is a factor based on a pure covalent
view of bonding in which electron pairs
are shared equally by neighbouring atoms.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 105 9/12/2022 9:36:11 AM106 chemistry
Interestingly, sulphur also forms many affinity, is the negative of the energy change
compounds in which the octet rule is obeyed. accompanying electron gain.
In sulphur dichloride, the S atom has an octet Obviously ionic bonds will be formed
of electrons around it. more easily between elements with
comparatively low ionization enthalpies
and elements with comparatively high
negative value of electron gain enthalpy.
Other drawbacks of the octet theory
Most ionic compounds have cations
• It is clear that octet rule is based upon
derived from metallic elements and anions
the chemical inertness of noble gases.
from non-metallic elements. The ammonium
However, some noble gases (for example
ion, NH+ (made up of two non-metallic
xenon and krypton) also combine with 4
elements) is an exception. It forms the cation
oxygen and fluorine to form a number of
of a number of ionic compounds.
compounds like XeF , KrF , XeOF etc.
2 2 2 Ionic compounds in the crystalline
• This theory does not account for the shape state consist of orderly three-dimensional
of molecules. arrangements of cations and anions held
• It does not explain the relative stability of together by coulombic interaction energies.
the molecules being totally silent about These compounds crystallise in different
crystal structures determined by the size of
the energy of a molecule.
the ions, their packing arrangements and
4.2 iOniC OR ELECtROvALEnt BOnD other factors. The crystal structure of sodium
chloride, NaCl (rock salt), for example is
From the Kössel and Lewis treatment of the
shown below.
formation of an ionic bond, it follows that the
formation of ionic compounds would primarily
depend upon:
• The ease of formation of the positive and
negative ions from the respective neutral
atoms;
• The arrangement of the positive and
negative ions in the solid, that is, the
lattice of the crystalline compound.
The formation of a positive ion involves
ionization, i.e., removal of electron(s) from
the neutral atom and that of the negative
ion involves the addition of electron(s) to the
Rock salt structure
neutral atom.
In ionic solids, the sum of the electron gain
M(g) → M+(g) + e– ;
enthalpy and the ionization enthalpy may be
Ionization enthalpy
positive but still the crystal structure gets
X(g) + e– → X – (g) ; stabilized due to the energy released in the
Electron gain enthalpy formation of the crystal lattice. For example:
the ionization enthalpy for Na+(g) formation
M+(g) + X –(g) → MX(s)
from Na(g) is 495.8 kJ mol–1 ; while the electron
The electron gain enthalpy, ∆ egH, is the gain enthalpy for the change Cl(g) + e–→
enthalpy change (Unit 3), when a gas phase
Cl– (g) is, – 348.7 kJ mol–1 only. The sum of the
atom in its ground state gains an electron.
two, 147.1 kJ mol-1 is more than compensated
The electron gain process may be exothermic
for by the enthalpy of lattice formation of
or endothermic. The ionization, on the other
NaCl(s) (–788 kJ mol–1). Therefore, the energy
hand, is always endothermic. Electron
released in the processes is more than the
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 106 9/12/2022 9:36:11 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 107
energy absorbed. thus a qualitative measure
of the stability of an ionic compound
is provided by its enthalpy of lattice
formation and not simply by achieving
octet of electrons around the ionic species
in gaseous state.
Since lattice enthalpy plays a key role
in the formation of ionic compounds, it is
important that we learn more about it.
4.2.1 Lattice Enthalpy
the Lattice Enthalpy of an ionic solid
is defined as the energy required to
completely separate one mole of a solid
ionic compound into gaseous constituent
ions. For example, the lattice enthalpy of
NaCl is 788 kJ mol–1. This means that 788
Fig. 4.1 The bond length in a covalent
kJ of energy is required to separate one mole
molecule AB.
of solid NaCl into one mole of Na+ (g) and one R = r + r (R is the bond length and r and r are
A B A B
mole of Cl– (g) to an infinite distance. the covalent radii of atoms A and B
respectively)
This process involves both the attractive
forces between ions of opposite charges
in the same molecule. the van der waals
and the repulsive forces between ions of
radius represents the overall size of the
like charge. The solid crystal being three-
atom which includes its valence shell in a
dimensional; it is not possible to calculate
nonbonded situation. Further, the van der
lattice enthalpy directly from the interaction
Waals radius is half of the distance between
of forces of attraction and repulsion only.
two similar atoms in separate molecules in
Factors associated with the crystal geometry
a solid. Covalent and van der Waals radii of
have to be included.
chlorine are depicted in Fig. 4.2.
4.3 BOnD pARAMEtERS
r =99pm
4.3.1 Bond Length c 1 9
8
p
Bond length is defined as the equilibrium m
distance between the nuclei of two bonded
atoms in a molecule. Bond lengths are
measured by spectroscopic, X-ray diffraction
and electron-diffraction techniques about
which you will learn in higher classes. Each
r
atom of the bonded pair contributes to the vdw=
bond length (Fig. 4.1). In the case of a covalent 1
8
0
bond, the contribution from each atom is p
mm
called the covalent radius of that atom. p
0
6
3
the covalent radius is measured
approximately as the radius of an atom’s
Fig. 4.2 Covalent and van der Waals radii in
core which is in contact with the core of an
a chlorine molecule. The inner circles
adjacent atom in a bonded situation. The
correspond to the size of the chlorine
covalent radius is half of the distance between atom (r and r are van der Waals and
vdw c
two similar atoms joined by a covalent bond covalent radii respectively).
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 107 9/12/2022 9:36:11 AM108 chemistry
Some typical average bond lengths for table 4.2 Average Bond Lengths for Some
single, double and triple bonds are shown in Single, Double and triple Bonds
Table 4.2. Bond lengths for some common
Covalent Bond
molecules are given in Table 4.3. Bond type
Length (pm)
The covalent radii of some common
O–H 96
elements are listed in Table 4.4.
C–H 107
4.3.2 Bond Angle N–O 136
C–O 143
It is defined as the angle between the orbitals
C–N 143
containing bonding electron pairs around the
C–C 154
central atom in a molecule/complex ion. Bond
C=O 121
angle is expressed in degree which can be N=O 122
experimentally determined by spectroscopic C=C 133
methods. It gives some idea regarding the C=N 138
distribution of orbitals around the central C≡N 116
atom in a molecule/complex ion and hence it C≡C 120
helps us in determining its shape. For
table 4.3 Bond Lengths in Some Common
example H–O–H bond angle in water can be
Molecules
represented as under :
Molecule Bond Length (pm)
H (H – H) 74
2
F (F – F) 144
2
4.3.3 Bond Enthalpy Cl (Cl – Cl) 199
2
It is defined as the amount of energy required Br (Br – Br) 228
2
to break one mole of bonds of a particular I (I – I) 267
2
type between two atoms in a gaseous state. N (N ≡ N) 109
2
The unit of bond enthalpy is kJ mol–1. For O (O = O) 121
2
example, the H – H bond enthalpy in hydrogen HF (H – F) 92
molecule is 435.8 kJ mol–1. HCl (H – Cl) 127
HBr (H – Br) 141
H (g) → H(g) + H(g); ∆ H = 435.8 kJ mol–1
2 a HI (H – I) 160
Similarly the bond enthalpy for molecules
containing multiple bonds, for example O and table 4.4 Covalent Radii, *r /(pm)
2 cov
N will be as under :
2
O (O = O) (g) → O(g) + O(g);
2
∆ H = 498 kJ mol–1
a
N (N ≡ N) (g) → N(g) + N(g);
2
∆ H = 946.0 kJ mol–1
a
It is important that larger the bond
dissociation enthalpy, stronger will be the
bond in the molecule. For a heteronuclear
diatomic molecules like HCl, we have
HCl (g) → H(g) + Cl (g); ∆ H = 431.0 kJ mol–1
a
In case of polyatomic molecules, the
measurement of bond strength is more
complicated. For example in case of H O
2 * The values cited are for single bonds, except where
molecule, the enthalpy needed to break the otherwise indicated in parenthesis. (See also Unit 3 for
two O – H bonds is not the same. periodic trends).
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 108 9/12/2022 9:36:11 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 109
H O(g) → H(g) + OH(g); ∆ H = 502 kJ mol–1
2 a 1
OH(g) → H(g) + O(g); ∆ H = 427 kJ mol–1
a 2
The difference in the ∆ H value shows
a
that the second O – H bond undergoes
some change because of changed chemical
environment. This is the reason for some
difference in energy of the same O – H bond
in different molecules like C H OH (ethanol)
2 5
and water. Therefore in polyatomic molecules
the term mean or average bond enthalpy
is used. It is obtained by dividing total bond
dissociation enthalpy by the number of bonds
broken as explained below in case of water
molecule,
502 + 427 Fig. 4.3 Resonance in the O molecule
Average bond enthalpy = 3
2
(structures I and II represent the two canonical
= 464.5 kJ mol–1
forms while the structure III is the resonance hybrid)
4.3.4 Bond Order
in the Lewis description of covalent bond, In both structures we have a O–O single
the Bond Order is given by the number bond and a O=O double bond. The normal
of bonds between the two atoms in a O–O and O=O bond lengths are 148 pm
molecule. The bond order, for example in and 121 pm respectively. Experimentally
H (with a single shared electron pair), in O determined oxygen-oxygen bond lengths in
2 2
(with two shared electron pairs) and in N the O molecule are same (128 pm). Thus the
2 3
(with three shared electron pairs) is 1,2,3 oxygen-oxygen bonds in the O molecule are
3
respectively. Similarly in CO (three shared intermediate between a double and a single
electron pairs between C and O) the bond bond. Obviously, this cannot be represented
order is 3. For N , bond order is 3 and its by either of the two Lewis structures shown
2
is 946 kJ mol–1; being one of the highest above.
for a diatomic molecule.
The concept of resonance was introduced
isoelectronic molecules and ions have to deal with the type of difficulty experienced
identical bond orders; for example, F and in the depiction of accurate structures of
2
O2– have bond order 1. n , CO and nO+ have molecules like O . According to the concept
2 2 3
bond order 3. of resonance, whenever a single Lewis
structure cannot describe a molecule
A general correlation useful for
accurately, a number of structures with
understanding the stablities of molecules
is that: with increase in bond order, similar energy, positions of nuclei, bonding
bond enthalpy increases and bond length and non-bonding pairs of electrons are
decreases. taken as the canonical structures of the
hybrid which describes the molecule
4.3.5 Resonance Structures
accurately. Thus for O , the two structures
3
It is often observed that a single Lewis structure shown above constitute the canonical
is inadequate for the representation of a structures or resonance structures and
molecule in conformity with its experimentally their hybrid i.e., the III structure represents
determined parameters. For example, the the structure of O more accurately. This is
3
ozone, O molecule can be equally represented also called resonance hybrid. Resonance is
3
by the structures I and II shown below:
represented by a double headed arrow.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 109 9/12/2022 9:36:11 AM110 chemistry
Some of the other examples of resonance
structures are provided by the carbonate ion
and the carbon dioxide molecule.
Fig. 4.5 Resonance in CO molecule, I, II
problem 4.3 2
and III represent the three canonical
Explain the structure of CO2– ion in
3 forms.
terms of resonance.
Solution in general, it may be stated that
The single Lewis structure based on • Resonance stabilizes the molecule as the
the presence of two single bonds and energy of the resonance hybrid is less
one double bond between carbon than the energy of any single cannonical
and oxygen atoms is inadequate to structure; and,
represent the molecule accurately as it
• Resonance averages the bond
represents unequal bonds. According
characteristics as a whole.
to the experimental findings, all carbon
to oxygen bonds in CO2– are equivalent. Thus the energy of the O resonance
3 3
Therefore the carbonate ion is best hybrid is lower than either of the two
described as a resonance hybrid of the cannonical froms I and II (Fig. 4.3).
canonical forms I, II, and III shown below.
Many misconceptions are associated
with resonance and the same need to be
dispelled. You should remember that :
• The cannonical forms have no real
existence.
• The molecule does not exist for a certain
fraction of time in one cannonical form
and for other fractions of time in other
Fig. 4.4 Resonance in CO2–, I, II and III cannonical forms.
3
represent the three canonical • There is no such equilibrium between
forms. the cannonical forms as we have
problem 4.4 between tautomeric forms (keto and
enol) in tautomerism.
Explain the structure of CO molecule.
2 • The molecule as such has a single
Solution structure which is the resonance
The experimentally determined carbon hybrid of the cannonical forms and
to oxygen bond length in CO is which cannot as such be depicted by
2
115 pm. The lengths of a normal a single Lewis structure.
carbon to oxygen double bond (C=O)
and carbon to oxygen triple bond (C≡O)
4.3.6 polarity of Bonds
are 121 pm and 110 pm respectively.
The existence of a hundred percent ionic or
The carbon-oxygen bond lengths in
covalent bond represents an ideal situation.
CO (115 pm) lie between the values
for 2 C=O and C≡O. Obviously, a single In reality no bond or a compound is either
Lewis structure cannot depict this completely covalent or ionic. Even in case of
position and it becomes necessary to covalent bond between two hydrogen atoms,
write more than one Lewis structures there is some ionic character.
and to consider that the structure of
When covalent bond is formed between
CO is best described as a hybrid of
2 two similar atoms, for example in H , O ,
the canonical or resonance forms I, II 2 2
Cl , N or F , the shared pair of electrons is
and III.
2 2 2
equally attracted by the two atoms. As a result
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 110 9/12/2022 9:36:12 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 111
electron pair is situated exactly between the In case of polyatomic molecules the dipole
two identical nuclei. The bond so formed is moment not only depend upon the individual
called nonpolar covalent bond. Contrary to dipole moments of bonds known as bond
this in case of a heteronuclear molecule like dipoles but also on the spatial arrangement
HF, the shared electron pair between the two of various bonds in the molecule. In such
atoms gets displaced more towards fluorine case, the dipole moment of a molecule is the
since the electronegativity of fluorine (Unit 3) vector sum of the dipole moments of various
is far greater than that of hydrogen. The bonds. For example in H O molecule, which
2
resultant covalent bond is a polar covalent has a bent structure, the two O–H bonds are
bond. oriented at an angle of 104.50. Net dipole
As a result of polarisation, the molecule moment of 6.17 × 10–30 C m (1D = 3.33564
possesses the dipole moment (depicted × 10–30 C m) is the resultant of the dipole
below) which can be defined as the product of moments of two O–H bonds.
the magnitude of the charge and the distance
between the centres of positive and negative
charge. It is usually designated by a Greek
letter ‘µ’. Mathematically, it is expressed as
follows :
Dipole moment (µ) = charge (Q) × distance of
separation (r)
Dipole moment is usually expressed in Net Dipole moment, µ = 1.85 D
Debye units (D). The conversion factor is
= 1.85 × 3.33564 × 10–30 C m = 6.17 ×10–30 C m
1 D = 3.33564 × 10–30 C m
The dipole moment in case of BeF is zero.
where C is coulomb and m is meter. 2
This is because the two equal bond dipoles
Further dipole moment is a vector quantity
point in opposite directions and cancel the
and by convention it is depicted by a small
effect of each other.
arrow with tail on the negative centre and
head pointing towards the positive centre.
But in chemistry presence of dipole moment
is represented by the crossed arrow ( )
put on Lewis structure of the molecule. The
In tetra-atomic molecule, for example in
cross is on positive end and arrow head is on
BF , the dipole moment is zero although the
negative end. For example the dipole moment 3
B – F bonds are oriented at an angle of 120o
of HF may be represented as :
to one another, the three bond moments give
a net sum of zero as the resultant of any two
H F
is equal and opposite to the third.
This arrow symbolises the direction of the
shift of electron density in the molecule. Note
that the direction of crossed arrow is opposite
to the conventional direction of dipole moment
vector.
Peter Debye, the Dutch chemist
received Nobel prize in 1936 for
Let us study an interesting case of NH
his work on X-ray diffraction and 3
and NF molecule. Both the molecules have
dipole moments. The magnitude 3
pyramidal shape with a lone pair of electrons
of the dipole moment is given in
on nitrogen atom. Although fluorine is more
Debye units in order to honour him.
electronegative than nitrogen, the resultant
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 111 9/12/2022 9:36:12 AM112 chemistry
dipole moment of NH (4.90 × 10–30 C m) is • The smaller the size of the cation and the
3
greater than that of NF (0.8 × 10–30 C m). This larger the size of the anion, the greater
3
is because, in case of NH the orbital dipole the covalent character of an ionic bond.
3
due to lone pair is in the same direction as • The greater the charge on the cation, the
the resultant dipole moment of the N – H greater the covalent character of the ionic
bonds, whereas in NF the orbital dipole is in bond.
3
the direction opposite to the resultant dipole
• For cations of the same size and charge,
moment of the three N–F bonds. The orbital
the one, with electronic configuration
dipole because of lone pair decreases the effect
(n-1)dnnso, typical of transition metals, is
of the resultant N – F bond moments, which
more polarising than the one with a noble
results in the low dipole moment of NF as
3 gas configuration, ns2 np6, typical of alkali
represented below :
and alkaline earth metal cations.
The cation polarises the anion, pulling
the electronic charge toward itself and
thereby increasing the electronic charge
between the two. This is precisely what
happens in a covalent bond, i.e., buildup
of electron charge density between the
nuclei. The polarising power of the cation,
the polarisability of the anion and the
extent of distortion (polarisation) of anion
are the factors, which determine the per
Dipole moments of some molecules are
cent covalent character of the ionic bond.
shown in Table 4.5.
Just as all the covalent bonds have 4.4 tHE vALEnCE SHELL ELECtROn
some partial ionic character, the ionic pAiR REpULSiOn (vSEpR) tHEORy
bonds also have partial covalent character. As already explained, Lewis concept is unable
the partial covalent character of ionic to explain the shapes of molecules. This
bonds was discussed by Fajans in terms of theory provides a simple procedure to predict
the following rules: the shapes of covalent molecules. Sidgwick
table 4.5 Dipole Moments of Selected Molecules
Dipole
type of Molecule Example Geometry
Moment, µ(D)
Molecule (AB) HF 1.78 linear
HCl 1.07 linear
HBr 0.79 linear
Hl 0.38 linear
H 0 linear
2
Molecule (AB ) H O 1.85 bent
2 2
H S 0.95 bent
2
CO 0 linear
2
Molecule (AB ) NH 1.47 trigonal-pyramidal
3 3
NF 0.23 trigonal-pyramidal
3
BF 0 trigonal-planar
3
Molecule (AB ) CH 0 tetrahedral
4 4
CHCl 1.04 tetrahedral
3
CCl 0 tetrahedral
4
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 112 9/12/2022 9:36:12 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 113
and Powell in 1940, proposed a simple theory result in deviations from idealised shapes and
based on the repulsive interactions of the alterations in bond angles in molecules.
electron pairs in the valence shell of the For the prediction of geometrical shapes
atoms. It was further developed and redefined of molecules with the help of VSEPR theory,
by Nyholm and Gillespie (1957). it is convenient to divide molecules into
the main postulates of vSEpR theory are two categories as (i) molecules in which
as follows: the central atom has no lone pair and
• The shape of a molecule depends upon (ii) molecules in which the central atom
the number of valence shell electron pairs has one or more lone pairs.
(bonded or nonbonded) around the central Table 4.6 (page114) shows the
atom. arrangement of electron pairs about a
• Pairs of electrons in the valence shell repel central atom A (without any lone pairs) and
one another since their electron clouds are geometries of some molecules/ions of the type
negatively charged. AB. Table 4.7 (page 115) shows shapes of some
simple molecules and ions in which the central
• These pairs of electrons tend to occupy
atom has one or more lone pairs. Table 4.8
such positions in space that minimise
(page 116) explains the reasons for the
repulsion and thus maximise distance
distortions in the geometry of the molecule.
between them.
As depicted in Table 4.6, in the
• The valence shell is taken as a sphere
compounds of AB , AB , AB , AB and AB ,
with the electron pairs localising on the 2 3 4 5 6
the arrangement of electron pairs and the
spherical surface at maximum distance
B atoms around the central atom A are :
from one another.
linear, trigonal planar, tetrahedral,
• A multiple bond is treated as if it is a single
trigonal-bipyramidal and octahedral,
electron pair and the two or three electron
respectively. Such arrangement can be seen
pairs of a multiple bond are treated as a
in the molecules like BF (AB ), CH (AB ) and
single super pair. 3 3 4 4
PCl (AB ) as depicted below by their ball and
• Where two or more resonance structures stic5 k mo5 dels.
can represent a molecule, the VSEPR
model is applicable to any such structure.
the repulsive interaction of electron pairs
decrease in the order:
Lone pair (lp) – Lone pair (lp) > Lone pair
(lp) – Bond pair (bp) > Bond pair (bp) –
Bond pair (bp) Fig. 4.6 The shapes of molecules in which
central atom has no lone pair
Nyholm and Gillespie (1957) refined the
VSEPR model by explaining the important The VSEPR Theory is able to predict
difference between the lone pairs and bonding geometry of a large number of molecules,
pairs of electrons. While the lone pairs are especially the compounds of p-block elements
localised on the central atom, each bonded accurately. It is also quite successful in
pair is shared between two atoms. As a result, determining the geometry quite-accurately
the lone pair electrons in a molecule occupy even when the energy difference between
more space as compared to the bonding pairs possible structures is very small. The
of electrons. This results in greater repulsion theoretical basis of the VSEPR theory regarding
between lone pairs of electrons as compared the effects of electron pair repulsions on
to the lone pair - bond pair and bond pair - molecular shapes is not clear and continues
bond pair repulsions. These repulsion effects to be a subject of doubt and discussion.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 113 9/12/2022 9:36:12 AM114 chemistry
table 4.6 Geometry of Molecules in which the Central Atom has no Lone pair of Electrons
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 114 9/12/2022 9:36:13 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 115
table 4.7 Shape (geometry) of Some Simple Molecules/ions with Central ions having
One or More Lone pairs of Electrons(E).
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 115 9/12/2022 9:36:13 AM116 chemistry
table 4.8 Shapes of Molecules containing Bond pair and Lone pair
Molecule no. of no. of Arrangement Shape Reason for the
type bonding lone of electrons shape acquired
pairs pairs
AB E 4 1 Bent Theoretically the shape
2
should have been triangular
planar but actually it is found
to be bent or v-shaped. The
reason being the lone pair-
bond pair repulsion is much
more as compared to the bond
pair-bond pair repulsion. So
the angle is reduced to 119.5°
from 120°.
AB E 3 1 Trigonal Had there been a bp in place
3
of lp the shape would have
pyramidal
been tetrahedral but one
lone pair is present and due
to the repulsion between
lp-bp (which is more than
bp-bp repulsion) the angle
between bond pairs is
reduced to 107° from 109.5°.
Bent The shape should have been
AB E 2 2 tetrahedral if there were all bp
2 2
but two lp are present so the
shape is distorted tetrahedral
or angular. The reason is
lp-lp repulsion is more than
lp-bp repulsion which is more
than bp-bp repulsion. Thus,
the angle is reduced to 104.5°
from 109.5°.
AB E 4 1 See- In (a) the lp is present at axial
4
saw position so there are three
lp—bp repulsions at 90°.
In(b) the lp is in an equatorial
position, and there are two
lp—bp repulsions. Hence,
arrangement (b) is more
stable. The shape shown in
(b) is described as a distorted
tetrahedron, a folded square
(More stable) or a see-saw.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 116 9/12/2022 9:36:13 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 117
Molecule no. of no. of Arrangement Shape Reason for the
type bonding lone of electrons shape acquired
pairs pairs
AB E 3 2 T-shape In (a) the lp are at
3 2
equatorial position
so there are less lp-
bp repulsions as
compared to others
in which the lp are
at axial positions. So
structure (a) is most
stable. (T-shaped).
4.5 vALEnCE BOnD tHEORy of the valence bond theory is based on the
knowledge of atomic orbitals, electronic
As we know that Lewis approach helps in
configurations of elements (Units 2), the
writing the structure of molecules but it
overlap criteria of atomic orbitals, the
fails to explain the formation of chemical
hybridization of atomic orbitals and the
bond. It also does not give any reason for the
principles of variation and superposition. A
difference in bond dissociation enthalpies and
rigorous treatment of the VB theory in terms
bond lengths in molecules like H (435.8 kJ
2 of these aspects is beyond the scope of this
mol-1, 74 pm) and F (155 kJ mol-1, 144 pm),
2 book. Therefore, for the sake of convenience,
although in both the cases a single covalent
valence bond theory has been discussed in
bond is formed by the sharing of an electron
terms of qualitative and non-mathematical
pair between the respective atoms. It also
treatment only. To start with, let us consider
gives no idea about the shapes of polyatomic
the formation of hydrogen molecule which is
molecules.
the simplest of all molecules.
Similarly the VSEPR theory gives the Consider two hydrogen atoms A and B
geometry of simple molecules but theoretically, approaching each other having nuclei N
A
it does not explain them and also it has limited and N and electrons present in them are
B
applications. To overcome these limitations represented by e and e . When the two atoms
A B
the two important theories based on quantum are at large distance from each other, there
mechanical principles are introduced. These is no interaction between them. As these two
are valence bond (VB) theory and molecular atoms approach each other, new attractive
orbital (MO) theory. and repulsive forces begin to operate.
valence bond theory was introduced Attractive forces arise between:
by Heitler and London (1927) and developed (i) nucleus of one atom and its own electron
further by Pauling and others. A discussion that is N – e and N – e .
A A B B
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 117 9/12/2022 9:36:13 AM118 chemistry
(ii) nucleus of one atom and electron of together to form a stable molecule having the
other atom i.e., N – e , N – e . bond length of 74 pm.
A B B A
Similarly repulsive forces arise between Since the energy gets released when the
bond is formed between two hydrogen atoms,
(i) electrons of two atoms like e – e ,
A B
the hydrogen molecule is more stable than
(ii) nuclei of two atoms N – N .
A B that of isolated hydrogen atoms. The energy
Attractive forces tend to bring the two so released is called as bond enthalpy, which
atoms close to each other whereas repulsive is corresponding to minimum in the curve
forces tend to push them apart (Fig. 4.7). depicted in Fig. 4.8. Conversely, 435.8 kJ of
energy is required to dissociate one mole of
H molecule.
2
H (g) + 435.8 kJ mol–1 → H(g) + H(g)
2
Fig. 4.8 The potential energy curve for the
formation of H molecule as a function
2
of internuclear distance of the H atoms.
The minimum in the curve corresponds
to the most stable state of H .
2
4.5.1 Orbital Overlap Concept
In the formation of hydrogen molecule,
there is a minimum energy state when two
hydrogen atoms are so near that their atomic
orbitals undergo partial interpenetration. This
Fig. 4.7 Forces of attraction and repulsion
partial merging of atomic orbitals is called
during the formation of H molecule
2
overlapping of atomic orbitals which results in
Experimentally it has been found that
the pairing of electrons. The extent of overlap
the magnitude of new attractive force is
decides the strength of a covalent bond. In
more than the new repulsive forces. As a
general, greater the overlap the stronger is the
result, two atoms approach each other and
bond formed between two atoms. Therefore,
potential energy decreases. Ultimately a stage
is reached where the net force of attraction according to orbital overlap concept, the
balances the force of repulsion and system formation of a covalent bond between two
acquires minimum energy. At this stage atoms results by pairing of electrons present
two hydrogen atoms are said to be bonded in the valence shell having opposite spins.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 118 9/12/2022 9:36:13 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 119
4.5.2 Directional properties of Bonds
As we have already seen, the covalent bond
is formed by overlapping of atomic orbitals.
The molecule of hydrogen is formed due to the
overlap of 1s-orbitals of two H atoms.
In case of polyatomic molecules like CH ,
4
NH and H O, the geometry of the molecules
3 2
is also important in addition to the bond
formation. For example why is it so that CH
4
molecule has tetrahedral shape and HCH
bond angles are 109.5°? Why is the shape of
NH molecule pyramidal ?
3
The valence bond theory explains the
shape, the formation and directional properties
of bonds in polyatomic molecules like CH ,
4
NH and H O, etc. in terms of overlap and
3 2
hybridisation of atomic orbitals.
4.5.3 Overlapping of Atomic Orbitals
When orbitals of two atoms come close to form
bond, their overlap may be positive, negative
or zero depending upon the sign (phase) and
direction of orientation of amplitude of orbital
wave function in space (Fig. 4.9). Positive and
negative sign on boundary surface diagrams
in the Fig. 4.9 show the sign (phase) of orbital
wave function and are not related to charge.
Orbitals forming bond should have same sign Fig.4.9 Positive, negative and zero overlaps of
s and p atomic orbitals
(phase) and orientation in space. This is called
positive overlap. Various overlaps of s and p hydrogen. The four atomic orbitals of carbon,
orbitals are depicted in Fig. 4.9. each with an unpaired electron can overlap
with the 1s orbitals of the four H atoms which
The criterion of overlap, as the main factor
are also singly occupied. This will result in the
for the formation of covalent bonds applies
formation of four C-H bonds. It will, however,
uniformly to the homonuclear/heteronuclear
be observed that while the three p orbitals of
diatomic molecules and polyatomic molecules. carbon are at 90° to one another, the HCH
We know that the shapes of CH , NH , and angle for these will also be 90°. That is three
4 3
H O molecules are tetrahedral, pyramidal C-H bonds will be oriented at 90° to one
2
and bent respectively. It would be therefore another. The 2s orbital of carbon and the 1s
interesting to use VB theory to find out if these orbital of H are spherically symmetrical and
geometrical shapes can be explained in terms they can overlap in any direction. Therefore
of the orbital overlaps. the direction of the fourth C-H bond cannot
Let us first consider the CH (methane) be ascertained. This description does not fit
4
molecule. The electronic configuration of in with the tetrahedral HCH angles of 109.5°.
carbon in its ground state is [He]2s2 2p2 which Clearly, it follows that simple atomic orbital
in the excited state becomes [He] 2s1 2p 1 2p 1 overlap does not account for the directional
x y
2p1. The energy required for this excitation is characteristics of bonds in CH . Using similar
z 4
compensated by the release of energy due to procedure and arguments, it can be seen that in
overlap between the orbitals of carbon and the the case of NH and H O molecules, the HNH
3 2
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 119 9/12/2022 9:36:14 AM120 chemistry
and HOH angles should be 90°. This is in above and below the plane of the
disagreement with the actual bond angles of participating atoms.
107° and 104.5° in the NH and H O molecules
3 2
respectively.
4.5.4 types of Overlapping and nature of
Covalent Bonds
The covalent bond may be classified into
two types depending upon the types of
overlapping:
(i) Sigma(σ) bond, and (ii) pi(π) bond
(i) Sigma(σ) bond : This type of covalent 4.5.5 Strength of Sigma and pi Bonds
bond is formed by the end to end (head- Basically the strength of a bond depends
on) overlap of bonding orbitals along the
upon the extent of overlapping. In case of
internuclear axis. This is called as head
sigma bond, the overlapping of orbitals takes
on overlap or axial overlap. This can be
place to a larger extent. Hence, it is stronger
formed by any one of the following types
as compared to the pi bond where the extent
of combinations of atomic orbitals.
of overlapping occurs to a smaller extent.
• s-s overlapping : In this case, there is Further, it is important to note that in the
overlap of two half filled s-orbitals along
formation of multiple bonds between two
the internuclear axis as shown below :
atoms of a molecule, pi bond(s) is formed in
addition to a sigma bond.
4.6 HyBRiDiSAtiOn
In order to explain the characteristic
geometrical shapes of polyatomic molecules
• s-p overlapping: This type of overlap like CH , NH and H O etc., Pauling introduced
4 3 2
occurs between half filled s-orbitals of one the concept of hybridisation. According to him
atom and half filled p-orbitals of another
the atomic orbitals combine to form new set of
atom.
equivalent orbitals known as hybrid orbitals.
Unlike pure orbitals, the hybrid orbitals are
used in bond formation. The phenomenon is
known as hybridisation which can be defined
as the process of intermixing of the orbitals of
• p–p overlapping : This type of overlap slightly different energies so as to redistribute
takes place between half filled p-orbitals their energies, resulting in the formation of
of the two approaching atoms. new set of orbitals of equivalent energies and
shape. For example when one 2s and three
2p-orbitals of carbon hybridise, there is the
formation of four new sp3 hybrid orbitals.
Salient features of hybridisation: The main
(ii) pi( ) bond : In the formation of π bond
features of hybridisation are as under :
the atomic orbitals overlap in such a
1. The number of hybrid orbitals is equal to
way that their axes remain parallel to
the number of the atomic orbitals that get
each other and perpendicular to the
internuclear axis. The orbitals formed hybridised.
due to sidewise overlapping consists 2. The hybridised orbitals are always
of two saucer type charged clouds equivalent in energy and shape.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 120 9/12/2022 9:36:14 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 121
3. The hybrid orbitals are more effective in vacant 2p orbital to account for its bivalency.
forming stable bonds than the pure atomic One 2s and one 2p-orbital gets hybridised to
orbitals. form two sp hybridised orbitals. These two
sp hybrid orbitals are oriented in opposite
4. These hybrid orbitals are directed in
direction forming an angle of 180°. Each of
space in some preferred direction to have
the sp hybridised orbital overlaps with the
minimum repulsion between electron
2p-orbital of chlorine axially and form two Be-
pairs and thus a stable arrangement.
Cl sigma bonds. This is shown in Fig. 4.10.
Therefore, the type of hybridisation
indicates the geometry of the molecules.
important conditions for hybridisation
(i) The orbitals present in the valence shell
of the atom are hybridised.
Be
(ii) The orbitals undergoing hybridisation
should have almost equal energy.
(iii) Promotion of electron is not essential
condition prior to hybridisation.
(iv) It is not necessary that only half filled
orbitals participate in hybridisation.
In some cases, even filled orbitals of
valence shell take part in hybridisation.
Fig.4.10 (a) Formation of sp hybrids from s and
4.6.1 types of Hybridisation p orbitals; (b) Formation of the linear
There are various types of hybridisation BeCl molecule
2
involving s, p and d orbitals. The different
(ii) sp2 hybridisation : In this hybridisation
types of hybridisation are as under:
there is involvement of one s and two
(i) sp hybridisation: This type of hybridisation
p-orbitals in order to form three equivalent
involves the mixing of one s and one p orbital
sp2 hybridised orbitals. For example, in
resulting in the formation of two equivalent
BCl molecule, the ground state electronic
sp hybrid orbitals. The suitable orbitals for 3
configuration of central boron atom is
sp hybridisation are s and p, if the hybrid
z 1s22s22p1. In the excited state, one of the 2s
orbitals are to lie along the z-axis. Each sp
electrons is promoted to vacant 2p orbital as
hybrid orbitals has 50% s-character and
50% p-character. Such a molecule in which
the central atom is sp-hybridised and linked
directly to two other central atoms possesses
linear geometry. This type of hybridisation is
also known as diagonal hybridisation.
The two sp hybrids point in the opposite
direction along the z-axis with projecting
positive lobes and very small negative lobes,
which provides more effective overlapping
resulting in the formation of stronger bonds.
Example of molecule having sp
hybridisation
BeCl : The ground state electronic
2
configuration of Be is 1s22s2. In the exited Fig.4.11 Formation of sp2 hybrids and the BCl
3
state one of the 2s-electrons is promoted to molecule
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 121 9/12/2022 9:36:15 AM122 chemistry
a result boron has three unpaired electrons.
ground state is
2S22p1 x2p1 y2p1
z having three
These three orbitals (one 2s and two 2p)
unpaired electrons in the sp3 hybrid orbitals
hybridise to form three sp2 hybrid orbitals.
and a lone pair of electrons is present in the
The three hybrid orbitals so formed are
fourth one. These three hybrid orbitals overlap
oriented in a trigonal planar arrangement
with 1s orbitals of hydrogen atoms to form
and overlap with 2p orbitals of chlorine to
three N–H sigma bonds. We know that the
form three B-Cl bonds. Therefore, in BCl
3 force of repulsion between a lone pair and a
(Fig. 4.11), the geometry is trigonal planar
bond pair is more than the force of repulsion
with ClBCl bond angle of 120°.
between two bond pairs of electrons. The
(iii) sp3 hybridisation: This type of molecule thus gets distorted and the bond
hybridisation can be explained by taking the
angle is reduced to 107° from 109.5°. The
example of CH molecule in which there is
geometry of such a molecule will be pyramidal
4
mixing of one s-orbital and three p-orbitals
as shown in Fig. 4.13.
of the valence shell to form four sp3 hybrid
orbital of equivalent energies and shape. There
is 25% s-character and 75% p-character in
each sp3 hybrid orbital. The four sp3 hybrid
orbitals so formed are directed towards the
four corners of the tetrahedron. The angle
between sp3 hybrid orbital is 109.5° as shown
in Fig. 4.12.
Fig.4.13 Formation of NH molecule
3
In case of H O molecule, the four oxygen
2
orbitals (one 2s and three 2p) undergo sp3
hybridisation forming four sp3 hybrid orbitals
out of which two contain one electron each and
the other two contain a pair of electrons. These
σ four sp3 hybrid orbitals acquire a tetrahedral
geometry, with two corners occupied by
σ σ hydrogen atoms while the other two by the
lone pairs. The bond angle in this case is
reduced to 104.5° from 109.5° (Fig. 4.14)
σ
and the molecule thus acquires a V-shape or
angular geometry.
Fig.4.12 Formation of sp3 hybrids by the
combination of s, p , p and p atomic
x y z
orbitals of carbon and the formation of
CH molecule
4
The structure of NH and H O molecules
3 2
can also be explained with the help of sp3
hybridisation. In NH , the valence shell (outer)
3
electronic configuration of nitrogen in the Fig.4.14 Formation of H O molecule
2
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 122 9/12/2022 9:36:16 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 123
4.6.2 Other Examples of sp3, sp2 and sp used for making sp2–s sigma bond with two
Hybridisation hydrogen atoms. The unhybridised orbital (2p
x
sp3 Hybridisation in C H molecule: In or 2p ) of one carbon atom overlaps sidewise
2 6 y
ethane molecule both the carbon atoms with the similar orbital of the other carbon
assume sp3 hybrid state. One of the four atom to form weak π bond, which consists of
sp3 hybrid orbitals of carbon atom overlaps two equal electron clouds distributed above
axially with similar orbitals of other atom to and below the plane of carbon and hydrogen
form sp3-sp3 sigma bond while the other three atoms.
hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are used
Thus, in ethene molecule, the carbon-
in forming sp3–s sigma bonds with hydrogen
carbon bond consists of one sp2–sp2 sigma
atoms as discussed in section 4.6.1(iii).
bond and one pi (π ) bond between p orbitals
Therefore in ethane C–C bond length is 154
which are not used in the hybridisation and
pm and each C–H bond length is 109 pm.
are perpendicular to the plane of molecule; the
sp2 Hybridisation in C H : In the formation
2 4 bond length 134 pm. The C–H bond is sp2–s
of ethene molecule, one of the sp2 hybrid
sigma with bond length 108 pm. The H–C–H
orbitals of carbon atom overlaps axially with
bond angle is 117.6° while the H–C–C angle
sp2 hybridised orbital of another carbon atom
is 121°. The formation of sigma and pi bonds
to form C–C sigma bond. While the other two
sp2 hybrid orbitals of each carbon atom are in ethene is shown in Fig. 4.15.
Fig. 4.15 Formation of sigma and pi bonds in ethene
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 123 9/12/2022 9:36:16 AM124 chemistry
sp Hybridisation in C H : In the formation 4.6.3 Hybridisation of Elements
2 2
of ethyne molecule, both the carbon atoms involving d Orbitals
undergo sp-hybridisation having two The elements present in the third period
unhybridised orbital i.e., 2p and 2p . contain d orbitals in addition to s and p
y x
orbitals. The energy of the 3d orbitals are
One sp hybrid orbital of one carbon atom
comparable to the energy of the 3s and 3p
overlaps axially with sp hybrid orbital of the
orbitals. The energy of 3d orbitals are also
other carbon atom to form C–C sigma bond,
comparable to those of 4s and 4p orbitals.
while the other hybridised orbital of each
As a consequence the hybridisation involving
carbon atom overlaps axially with the half either 3s, 3p and 3d or 3d, 4s and 4p is
filled s orbital of hydrogen atoms forming possible. However, since the difference in
σ bonds. Each of the two unhybridised p energies of 3p and 4s orbitals is significant, no
orbitals of both the carbon atoms overlaps hybridisation involving 3p, 3d and 4s orbitals
sidewise to form two π bonds between the is possible.
carbon atoms. So the triple bond between the The important hybridisation schemes
two carbon atoms is made up of one sigma involving s, p and d orbitals are summarised
and two pi bonds as shown in Fig. 4.16. below:
Shape of
Hybridisation Atomic
molecules/ Examples
type orbitals
ions
Square dsp2 d+s+p(2) [Ni(CN) ]2–,
4
planar [Pt(Cl) ]2–
4
Trigonal sp3d s+p(3)+d PF , PCl
5 5
bipyramidal
Square sp3d2 s+p(3)+d(2) BrF
5
pyramidal
Octahedral sp3d2 s+p(3)+d(2) SF , [CrF ]3–
6 6
d2sp3 d(2)+s+p(3) [Co(NH ) ]3+
36
(i) Formation of PCl (sp3d hybridisation):
5
The ground state and the excited state outer
electronic configurations of phosphorus
(Z=15) are represented below.
Fig.4.16 Formation of sigma and pi bonds in sp3d hybrid orbitals filled by electron pairs
ethyne donated by five Cl atoms.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 124 9/12/2022 9:36:16 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 125
Now the five orbitals (i.e., one s, three six sp3d2 hybrid orbitals overlap with singly
p and one d orbitals) are available for occupied orbitals of fluorine atoms to form
hybridisation to yield a set of five sp3d hybrid six S–F sigma bonds. Thus SF molecule has
6
orbitals which are directed towards the five a regular octahedral geometry as shown in
corners of a trigonal bipyramidal as depicted Fig. 4.18.
in the Fig. 4.17.
sp3d2 hybridisation
Fig. 4.17 Trigonal bipyramidal geometry of PCl
5
molecule
It should be noted that all the bond angles
in trigonal bipyramidal geometry are not
equivalent. In PCl the five sp3d orbitals of
5
phosphorus overlap with the singly occupied
p orbitals of chlorine atoms to form five P–Cl
sigma bonds. Three P–Cl bond lie in one
plane and make an angle of 120° with each
other; these bonds are termed as equatorial
Fig. 4.18 Octahedral geometry of SF molecule
bonds. The remaining two P–Cl bonds–one 6
lying above and the other lying below the
equatorial plane, make an angle of 90° with 4.7 MOLECULAR ORBitAL tHEORy
the plane. These bonds are called axial bonds. Molecular orbital (MO) theory was developed
As the axial bond pairs suffer more repulsive by F. Hund and R.S. Mulliken in 1932. The
interaction from the equatorial bond pairs, salient features of this theory are :
therefore axial bonds have been found to
(i) The electrons in a molecule are present
be slightly longer and hence slightly weaker
in the various molecular orbitals as the
than the equatorial bonds; which makes PCl
5 electrons of atoms are present in the
molecule more reactive.
various atomic orbitals.
(ii) Formation of SF (sp3d2 hybridisation):
6 (ii) The atomic orbitals of comparable
In SF the central sulphur atom has the
6 energies and proper symmetry combine
ground state outer electronic configuration
to form molecular orbitals.
3s23p4. In the exited state the available six
orbitals i.e., one s, three p and two d are (iii) While an electron in an atomic orbital
singly occupied by electrons. These orbitals is influenced by one nucleus, in a
hybridise to form six new sp3d2 hybrid molecular orbital it is influenced by
orbitals, which are projected towards the six two or more nuclei depending upon the
corners of a regular octahedron in SF . These number of atoms in the molecule. Thus,
6
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 125 9/12/2022 9:36:17 AM126 chemistry
an atomic orbital is monocentric while ψ and ψ. Mathematically, the formation of
A B
a molecular orbital is polycentric. molecular orbitals may be described by the
linear combination of atomic orbitals that can
(iv) The number of molecular orbital formed
take place by addition and by subtraction of
is equal to the number of combining
wave functions of individual atomic orbitals
atomic orbitals. When two atomic
as shown below :
orbitals combine, two molecular orbitals
are formed. One is known as bonding ψ = ψ + ψ
MO A B
molecular orbital while the other is Therefore, the two molecular orbitals
called antibonding molecular orbital. σ and σ* are formed as :
(v) The bonding molecular orbital has σ = ψ + ψ
A B
lower energy and hence greater stability σ* = ψ – ψ
than the corresponding antibonding A B
The molecular orbital σ formed by the
molecular orbital.
addition of atomic orbitals is called the bonding
(vi) Just as the electron probability
molecular orbital while the molecular orbital
distribution around a nucleus in an
σ* formed by the subtraction of atomic orbital
atom is given by an atomic orbital, the
is called antibonding molecular orbital as
electron probability distribution around
depicted in Fig. 4.19.
a group of nuclei in a molecule is given
by a molecular orbital.
(vii) The molecular orbitals like atomic
orbitals are filled in accordance with
the aufbau principle obeying the Pauli’s
exclusion principle and the Hund’s rule.
4.7.1 Formation of Molecular Orbitals
σ* = ψ – ψ
Linear Combination of Atomic A B
Orbitals (LCAO)
According to wave mechanics, the atomic ψ ψ
orbitals can be expressed by wave functions A B
(ψ ’s) which represent the amplitude of the
σ = ψ + ψ
electron waves. These are obtained from A B
the solution of Schrödinger wave equation.
However, since it cannot be solved for any
system containing more than one electron,
molecular orbitals which are one electron
wave functions for molecules are difficult Fig.4.19 Formation of bonding (σ) and antibonding
(σ*) molecular orbitals by the linear
to obtain directly from the solution of
combination of atomic orbitals ψ and
Schrödinger wave equation. To overcome A
ψ centered on two atoms A and B
this problem, an approximate method known B
respectively.
as linear combination of atomic orbitals
(LCAO) has been adopted.
Qualitatively, the formation of molecular
Let us apply this method to the orbitals can be understood in terms of the
homonuclear diatomic hydrogen molecule. constructive or destructive interference of the
Consider the hydrogen molecule consisting electron waves of the combining atoms. In the
of two atoms A and B. Each hydrogen atom formation of bonding molecular orbital, the
in the ground state has one electron in 1s two electron waves of the bonding atoms
orbital. The atomic orbitals of these atoms reinforce each other due to constructive
may be represented by the wave functions interference while in the formation of
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 126 9/12/2022 9:36:17 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 127
antibonding molecular orbital, the electron as the molecular axis. It is important to note
waves cancel each other due to destructive that atomic orbitals having same or nearly
interference. As a result, the electron density in the same energy will not combine if they do
a bonding molecular orbital is located between not have the same symmetry. For example,
the nuclei of the bonded atoms because of 2p orbital of one atom can combine with 2p
z z
which the repulsion between the nuclei is very orbital of the other atom but not with the
less while in case of an antibonding molecular 2p or 2p orbitals because of their different
x y
orbital, most of the electron density is located symmetries.
away from the space between the nuclei. 3. the combining atomic orbitals must
Infact, there is a nodal plane (on which the overlap to the maximum extent. Greater
electron density is zero) between the nuclei the extent of overlap, the greater will be the
and hence the repulsion between the nuclei is electron-density between the nuclei of a
high. Electrons placed in a bonding molecular molecular orbital.
orbital tend to hold the nuclei together and
4.7.3 types of Molecular Orbitals
stabilise a molecule. Therefore, a bonding
molecular orbital always possesses lower Molecular orbitals of diatomic molecules are
energy than either of the atomic orbitals that designated as σ (sigma), π (pi), δ (delta), etc.
have combined to form it. In contrast, the
In this nomenclature, the sigma ( )
electrons placed in the antibonding molecular
molecular orbitals are symmetrical around
orbital destabilise the molecule. This is
the bond-axis while pi ( ) molecular orbitals
because the mutual repulsion of the electrons
are not symmetrical. For example, the linear
in this orbital is more than the attraction
combination of 1s orbitals centered on two
between the electrons and the nuclei, which nuclei produces two molecular orbitals which
causes a net increase in energy. are symmetrical around the bond-axis. Such
It may be noted that the energy of the molecular orbitals are of the σ type and are
antibonding orbital is raised above the designated as σ1s and σ*1s [Fig. 4.20(a), page
energy of the parent atomic orbitals that 124]. if internuclear axis is taken to be in
have combined and the energy of the bonding the z-direction, it can be seen that a linear
orbital has been lowered than the parent combination of 2p - orbitals of two atoms
z
orbitals. The total energy of two molecular also produces two sigma molecular orbitals
orbitals, however, remains the same as that designated as 2p and *2p . [Fig. 4.20(b)]
z z
of two original atomic orbitals.
Molecular orbitals obtained from 2p and
x
4.7.2 Conditions for the Combination of 2p orbitals are not symmetrical around the
y
Atomic Orbitals bond axis because of the presence of positive
lobes above and negative lobes below the
The linear combination of atomic orbitals to
molecular plane. Such molecular orbitals,
form molecular orbitals takes place only if the
are labelled as π and =π* [Fig. 4.20(c)]. A
following conditions are satisfied:
π bonding MO has larger electron density
1. the combining atomic orbitals must
above and below the inter-nuclear axis. The
have the same or nearly the same energy.
π* antibonding MO has a node between the
This means that 1s orbital can combine with
nuclei.
another 1s orbital but not with 2s orbital
because the energy of 2s orbital is appreciably 4.7.4 Energy Level Diagram for Molecular
higher than that of 1s orbital. This is not true Orbitals
if the atoms are very different.
We have seen that 1s atomic orbitals on two
2. the combining atomic orbitals must atoms form two molecular orbitals designated
have the same symmetry about the as σ1s and σ*1s. In the same manner, the 2s
molecular axis. By convention z-axis is taken and 2p atomic orbitals (eight atomic orbitals
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 127 9/12/2022 9:36:17 AM128 chemistry
Fig. 4.20 Contours and energies of bonding and antibonding molecular orbitals formed through
combinations of (a) 1s atomic orbitals; (b) 2p atomic orbitals and (c) 2p atomic orbitals.
z x
on two atoms) give rise to the following eight The energy levels of these molecular
molecular orbitals: orbitals have been determined experimentally
Antibonding MOs σ∗2s σ∗2p π∗2p π∗2p from spectroscopic data for homonuclear
z x y
diatomic molecules of second row elements
Bonding MOs σ2s σ2p π2p π2p
z x y of the periodic table. The increasing order of
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 128 9/12/2022 9:36:17 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 129
energies of various molecular orbitals for O The rules discussed above regarding the
2
and F is given below: stability of the molecule can be restated in
2
terms of bond order as follows: A positive bond
1s <  ∗1s <  2s <  ∗2s < 2p < (π 2p =π 2p )
z x y order (i.e., N > N ) means a stable molecule
< (π ∗2p = π∗ 2p ) <  ∗2p b a
x y z while a negative (i.e., N <N ) or zero (i.e.,
b a
However, this sequence of energy levels N = N ) bond order means an unstable
b a
of molecular orbitals is not correct for the molecule.
remaining molecules Li , Be , B , C , N . For Nature of the bond
2 2 2 2 2
instance, it has been observed experimentally Integral bond order values of 1, 2 or 3
that for molecules such as B , C , N , etc. correspond to single, double or triple bonds
2 2 2
the increasing order of energies of various respectively as studied in the classical
molecular orbitals is concept.
1s <  ∗1s < 2s <  ∗2s < (π 2 p = π 2 p )
x y Bond-length
< 2p < (π ∗2p =π∗2p ) <  ∗2p
The bond order between two atoms in a
z x y z
The important characteristic feature molecule may be taken as an approximate
of this order is that the energy of 2p measure of the bond length. The bond length
z
molecular orbital is higher than that decreases as bond order increases.
of 2p and 2p molecular orbitals.
x y Magnetic nature
4.7.5 Electronic Configuration and If all the molecular orbitals in a molecule are
Molecular Behaviour doubly occupied, the substance is diamagnetic
(repelled by magnetic field). However if one or
The distribution of electrons among various
more molecular orbitals are singly occupied it
molecular orbitals is called the electronic
is paramagnetic (attracted by magnetic field),
configuration of the molecule. From the
e.g., O molecule.
electronic configuration of the molecule, it is 2
possible to get important information about
4.8 BOnDinG in SOME HOMOnUCLEAR
the molecule as discussed below.
DiAtOMiC MOLECULES
Stability of Molecules: If N is the number
b In this section we shall discuss bonding in
of electrons occupying bonding orbitals and
some homonuclear diatomic molecules.
N the number occupying the antibonding
a 1. Hydrogen molecule (H ): It is formed by
orbitals, then 2
the combination of two hydrogen atoms. Each
(i) the molecule is stable if N is greater hydrogen atom has one electron in 1s orbital.
b
than N , and Therefore, in all there are two electrons in
a
(ii) the molecule is unstable if N is less hydrogen molecule which are present in σ1s
b
than N . molecular orbital. So electronic configuration
a
of hydrogen molecule is
In (i) more bonding orbitals are occupied
and so the bonding influence is stronger and a H : (σ1s)2
2
stable molecule results. In (ii) the antibonding The bond order of H molecule can be
2
influence is stronger and therefore the calculated as given below:
molecule is unstable.
N N 20
Bond order Bond order = b 2 a  2 1
Bond order (b.o.) is defined as one half the This means that the two hydrogen atoms
difference between the number of electrons are bonded together by a single covalent bond.
present in the bonding and the antibonding The bond dissociation energy of hydrogen
orbitals i.e., molecule has been found to be 438 kJ mol–1
and bond length equal to 74 pm. Since no
Bond order (b.o.) = ½ (N –N )
b a
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 129 9/12/2022 9:36:17 AM130 chemistry
unpaired electron is present in hydrogen vapour phase. It is important to note that
molecule, therefore, it is diamagnetic. double bond in C consists of both pi bonds
2
2. Helium molecule (He ): The electronic because of the presence of four electrons in
2
configuration of helium atom is 1s2. Each two pi molecular orbitals. In most of the other
helium atom contains 2 electrons, therefore, molecules a double bond is made up of a
in He molecule there would be 4 electrons. sigma bond and a pi bond. In a similar fashion
2
the bonding in N molecule can be discussed.
These electrons will be accommodated in 2
σ1sand σ*1s molecular orbitals leading to 5. Oxygen molecule (O ): The electronic
2
electronic configuration: configuration of oxygen atom is 1s2 2s2 2p4.
Each oxygen atom has 8 electrons, hence,
He : (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2
2 in O molecule there are 16 electrons. The
2
electronic configuration of O molecule,
Bond order of He is ½(2 – 2) = 0 2
2 therefore, is
He molecule is therefore unstable and
2
does not exist.
O : (1s)2 ( ∗1s)2 ( 2s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (2p )2
2 z
Similarly, it can be shown that Be molecule (π2p 2 ≡ π2p 2) (π∗2p1 ≡ π ∗2p 1)
2
(σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2 (σ*2s)2 also does not exist. x y x y
3. Lithium molecule (Li ): The electronic
2 O2 :
configuration of lithium is 1s2, 2s1. There
are six electrons in Li . The electronic
2
configuration of Li molecule, therefore, is From the electronic configuration of O
2 2
molecule it is clear that ten electrons are
Li : (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2 (σ2s)2
2 present in bonding molecular orbitals and six
The above configuration is also written electrons are present in antibonding molecular
as KK(σ2s)2 where KK represents the closed orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is
K shell structure (σ1s)2 (σ*1s)2.
From the electronic configuration of Li Bond order = [N – N ] = [10 – 6] =2
2 b a
molecule it is clear that there are four electrons
So in oxygen molecule, atoms are held
present in bonding molecular orbitals and two
by a double bond. Moreover, it may be noted
electrons present in antibonding molecular
that it contains two unpaired electrons in
orbitals. Its bond order, therefore, is ½ (4 –
π ∗2p and π ∗2p molecular orbitals, therefore,
2) = 1. It means that Li molecule is stable x y
2 O molecule should be paramagnetic,
and since it has no unpaired electrons it 2
a prediction that corresponds to
should be diamagnetic. Indeed diamagnetic
experimental observation. In this way, the
Li molecules are known to exist in the
2 theory successfully explains the paramagnetic
vapour phase.
nature of oxygen.
4. Carbon molecule (C ): The electronic
2 Similarly, the electronic configurations
configuration of carbon is 1s2 2s2 2p2. There
[ ]
of other homonuclear diatomic molecules of
are twelve electrons in C . The electronic
2 the second row of the periodic table can be
configuration of C molecule, therefore, is
2 written. In Fig. 4.21 are given the molecular
C : (1s)2 ( ∗1s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (π2p2 = π2p2) orbital occupancy and molecular properties
2 x y
for B through Ne . The sequence of MOs and
or KK (2s)2 ( ∗ 2s)2 (π2p2 = π2p2) their 2 electron popu2 lation are shown. The bond
x y
energy, bond length, bond order, magnetic
The bond order of C is ½ (8 – 4) = 2
2 properties and valence electron configuration
and C should be diamagnetic. Diamagnetic
2 appear below the orbital diagrams.
C molecules have indeed been detected in
2
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 130 9/12/2022 9:36:18 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 131
Fig. 4.21 MO occupancy and molecular properties for B through Ne .
2 2
4.9 HyDROGEn BOnDinG Hydrogen bond is represented by a dotted
line (– – –) while a solid line represents the
Nitrogen, oxygen and fluorine are the highly
electronegative elements. When they are covalent bond. thus, hydrogen bond can be
attached to a hydrogen atom to form covalent defined as the attractive force which binds
bond, the electrons of the covalent bond are hydrogen atom of one molecule with the
shifted towards the more electronegative electronegative atom (F, O or n) of another
atom. This partially positively charged molecule.
hydrogen atom forms a bond with the other
4.9.1 Cause of Formation of Hydrogen
more electronegative atom. This bond is
[ ] Bond
known as hydrogen bond and is weaker
When hydrogen is bonded to strongly
than the covalent bond. For example, in HF
electronegative element ‘X’, the electron pair
molecule, the hydrogen bond exists between
shared between the two atoms moves far
hydrogen atom of one molecule and fluorine
away from hydrogen atom. As a result the
atom of another molecule as depicted below :
hydrogen atom becomes highly electropositive
– – – Hδ+–Fδ– – – –Hδ+ – Fδ– – – – Hδ+ – Fδ–
with respect to the other atom ‘X’. Since
Here, hydrogen bond acts as a bridge between there is displacement of electrons towards
two atoms which holds one atom by covalent X, the hydrogen acquires fractional positive
bond and the other by hydrogen bond. charge (δ +) while ‘X’ attain fractional negative
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 131 9/12/2022 9:36:18 AM132 chemistry
charge (δ–). This results in the formation of a H-bond in case of HF molecule, alcohol or
polar molecule having electrostatic force of water molecules, etc.
attraction which can be represented as:
(2) Intramolecular hydrogen bond : It is
formed when hydrogen atom is in between
Hδ+ – Xδ– – – – Hδ+ – Xδ– – – – Hδ+ – Xδ–
the two highly electronegative (F, O, N)
The magnitude of H-bonding depends atoms present within the same molecule. For
on the physical state of the compound. It is example, in o-nitrophenol the hydrogen is in
maximum in the solid state and minimum in between the two oxygen atoms.
the gaseous state. Thus, the hydrogen bonds
have strong influence on the structure and
properties of the compounds.
4.9.2 types of H-Bonds
There are two types of H-bonds
(i) Intermolecular hydrogen bond
(ii) Intramolecular hydrogen bond
(1) Intermolecular hydrogen bond : It is
formed between two different molecules of the Fig. 4.22 Intramolecular hydrogen bonding in
same or different compounds. For example, o-nitrophenol molecule
SUMMARy
Kössel’s first insight into the mechanism of formation of electropositive and electronegative
ions related the process to the attainment of noble gas configurations by the respective ions.
Electrostatic attraction between ions is the cause for their stability. This gives the concept
of electrovalency.
The first description of covalent bonding was provided by Lewis in terms of the sharing
of electron pairs between atoms and he related the process to the attainment of noble gas
configurations by reacting atoms as a result of sharing of electrons. The Lewis dot symbols
show the number of valence electrons of the atoms of a given element and Lewis dot structures
show pictorial representations of bonding in molecules.
An ionic compound is pictured as a three-dimensional aggregation of positive and negative
ions in an ordered arrangement called the crystal lattice. In a crystalline solid there is a
charge balance between the positive and negative ions. The crystal lattice is stabilized by
the enthalpy of lattice formation.
While a single covalent bond is formed by sharing of an electron pair between two atoms,
multiple bonds result from the sharing of two or three electron pairs. Some bonded atoms
have additional pairs of electrons not involved in bonding. These are called lone-pairs of
electrons. A Lewis dot structure shows the arrangement of bonded pairs and lone pairs around
each atom in a molecule. important parameters, associated with chemical bonds, like:
bond length, bond angle, bond enthalpy, bond order and bond polarity have significant
effect on the properties of compounds.
A number of molecules and polyatomic ions cannot be described accurately by a single
Lewis structure and a number of descriptions (representations) based on the same skeletal
structure are written and these taken together represent the molecule or ion. This is a very
important and extremely useful concept called resonance. The contributing structures
or canonical forms taken together constitute the resonance hybrid which represents the
molecule or ion.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 132 9/12/2022 9:36:18 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 133
The VSEPR model used for predicting the geometrical shapes of molecules is based on
the assumption that electron pairs repel each other and, therefore, tend to remain as far
apart as possible. According to this model, molecular geometry is determined by repulsions
between lone pairs and lone pairs; lone pairs and bonding pairs and bonding pairs and bonding
pairs. The order of these repulsions being : lp-lp > lp-bp > bp-bp
The valence bond (vB) approach to covalent bonding is basically concerned with the
energetics of covalent bond formation about which the Lewis and VSEPR models are silent.
Basically the VB theory discusses bond formation in terms of overlap of orbitals. For example
the formation of the H molecule from two hydrogen atoms involves the overlap of the 1s
2
orbitals of the two H atoms which are singly occupied. It is seen that the potential energy
of the system gets lowered as the two H atoms come near to each other. At the equilibrium
inter-nuclear distance (bond distance) the energy touches a minimum. Any attempt to bring
the nuclei still closer results in a sudden increase in energy and consequent destabilization
of the molecule. Because of orbital overlap the electron density between the nuclei increases
which helps in bringing them closer. It is however seen that the actual bond enthalpy and
bond length values are not obtained by overlap alone and other variables have to be taken
into account.
For explaining the characteristic shapes of polyatomic molecules Pauling introduced the
concept of hybridisation of atomic orbitals. sp, sp2, sp3 hybridizations of atomic orbitals
of Be, B, C, N and O are used to explain the formation and geometrical shapes of molecules
like BeCl , BCl , CH , NH and H O. They also explain the formation of multiple bonds in
2 3 4 3 2
molecules like C H and C H .
2 2 2 4
The molecular orbital (MO) theory describes bonding in terms of the combination and
arrangment of atomic orbitals to form molecular orbitals that are associated with the molecule
as a whole. The number of molecular orbitals are always equal to the number of atomic
orbitals from which they are formed. Bonding molecular orbitals increase electron density
between the nuclei and are lower in energy than the individual atomic orbitals. Antibonding
molecular orbitals have a region of zero electron density between the nuclei and have more
energy than the individual atomic orbitals.
The electronic configuration of the molecules is written by filling electrons in the molecular
orbitals in the order of increasing energy levels. As in the case of atoms, the Pauli exclusion
principle and Hund’s rule are applicable for the filling of molecular orbitals. Molecules are
said to be stable if the number of elctrons in bonding molecular orbitals is greater than that
in antibonding molecular orbitals.
Hydrogen bond is formed when a hydrogen atom finds itself between two highly
electronegative atoms such as F, O and N. It may be intermolecular (existing between two
or more molecules of the same or different substances) or intramolecular (present within
the same molecule). Hydrogen bonds have a powerful effect on the structure and properties
of many compounds.
EXERCiSES
4.1 Explain the formation of a chemical bond.
4.2 Write Lewis dot symbols for atoms of the following elements : Mg, Na, B, O, N, Br.
4.3 Write Lewis symbols for the following atoms and ions:
S and S2–; Al and Al3+; H and H–
4.4 Draw the Lewis structures for the following molecules and ions :
H S, SiCl , BeF , CO2−, HCOOH
2 4 2 3
4.5 Define octet rule. Write its significance and limitations.
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 133 9/12/2022 9:36:18 AM134 chemistry
4.6 Write the favourable factors for the formation of ionic bond.
4.7 Discuss the shape of the following molecules using the VSEPR model:
BeCl , BCl , SiCl , AsF , H S, PH
2 3 4 5 2 3
4.8 Although geometries of NH and H O molecules are distorted tetrahedral, bond angle
3 2
in water is less than that of ammonia. Discuss.
4.9 How do you express the bond strength in terms of bond order ?
4.10 Define the bond length.
4.11 Explain the important aspects of resonance with reference to the CO2− ion.
3
4.12 H PO can be represented by structures 1 and 2 shown below. Can these two
3 3
structures be taken as the canonical forms of the resonance hybrid representing
H PO ? If not, give reasons for the same.
3 3
4.13 Write the resonance structures for SO , NO and
NO−
.
3 2 3
4.14 Use Lewis symbols to show electron transfer between the following atoms to form
cations and anions : (a) K and S (b) Ca and O (c) Al and N.
4.15 Although both CO and H O are triatomic molecules, the shape of H O molecule is
2 2 2
bent while that of CO is linear. Explain this on the basis of dipole moment.
2
4.16 Write the significance/applications of dipole moment.
4.17 Define electronegativity. How does it differ from electron gain enthalpy ?
4.18 Explain with the help of suitable example polar covalent bond.
4.19 Arrange the bonds in order of increasing ionic character in the molecules: LiF, K O,
2
N , SO and ClF .
2 2 3
4.20 The skeletal structure of CH COOH as shown below is correct, but some of the bonds
3
are shown incorrectly. Write the correct Lewis structure for acetic acid.
4.21 Apart from tetrahedral geometry, another possible geometry for CH is square planar
4
with the four H atoms at the corners of the square and the C atom at its centre.
Explain why CH is not square planar ?
4
4.22 Explain why BeH molecule has a zero dipole moment although the Be–H bonds are
2
polar.
4.23 Which out of NH and NF has higher dipole moment and why ?
3 3
4.24 What is meant by hybridisation of atomic orbitals? Describe the shapes of sp, sp2,
sp3 hybrid orbitals.
4.25 Describe the change in hybridisation (if any) of the Al atom in the following reaction.
AlCl Cl  AlCl
3 4
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 134 9/12/2022 9:36:19 AMChemiCal Bonding and moleCular StruCture 135
4.26 Is there any change in the hybridisation of B and N atoms as a result of the following
reaction?
4.27 Draw diagrams showing the formation of a double bond and a triple bond between
carbon atoms in C H and C H molecules.
2 4 2 2
4.28 What is the total number of sigma and pi bonds in the following molecules?
(a) C H (b) C H
2 2 2 4
4.29 Considering x-axis as the internuclear axis which out of the following will
not form a sigma bond and why? (a) 1s and 1s (b) 1s and 2p ; (c) 2p and 2p
x y y
(d) 1s and 2s.
4.30 Which hybrid orbitals are used by carbon atoms in the following molecules?
CH –CH ; (b) CH –CH=CH ; (c) CH -CH -OH; (d) CH -CHO (e) CH COOH
3 3 3 2 3 2 3 3
4.31 What do you understand by bond pairs and lone pairs of electrons? Illustrate by
giving one exmaple of each type.
4.32 Distinguish between a sigma and a pi bond.
4.33 Explain the formation of H molecule on the basis of valence bond theory.
2
4.34 Write the important conditions required for the linear combination of atomic orbitals
to form molecular orbitals.
4.35 Use molecular orbital theory to explain why the Be molecule does not exist.
2
4.36 Compare the relative stability of the following species and indicate their magnetic
properties;
(superoxide),
O2−
(peroxide)
2
4.37 Write the significance of a plus and a minus sign shown in representing the orbitals.
4.38 Describe the hybridisation in case of PCl . Why are the axial bonds longer as compared
5
to equatorial bonds?
4.39 Define hydrogen bond. Is it weaker or stronger than the van der Waals forces?
4.40 What is meant by the term bond order? Calculate the bond order of : N , O , O+
2 2 2
and O –.
2
2024-25
Unit 4.indd 135 9/12/2022 9:36:19 AM