C E
HAPTER LEVEN
T
HERMODYNAMICS
11.1 INTRODUCTION
In previous chapter we have studied thermal properties of
matter. In this chapter we shall study laws that govern
thermal energy. We shall study the processes where work is
11.1 Introduction
converted into heat and vice versa. In winter, when we rub
11.2 Thermal equilibrium our palms together, we feel warmer; here work done in rubbing
11.3 Zeroth law of produces the ‘heat’. Conversely, in a steam engine, the ‘heat’
Thermodynamics of the steam is used to do useful work in moving the pistons,
11.4 Heat, internal energy and which in turn rotate the wheels of the train.
work In physics, we need to define the notions of heat,
11.5 First law of temperature, work, etc. more carefully. Historically, it took a
thermodynamics long time to arrive at the proper concept of ‘heat’. Before the
11.6 Specific heat capacity modern picture, heat was regarded as a fine invisible fluid
11.7 Thermodynamic state filling in the pores of a substance. On contact between a hot
variables and equation of body and a cold body, the fluid (called caloric) flowed from
state the colder to the hotter body ! This is similar to what happens
11.8 Thermodynamic processes when a horizontal pipe connects two tanks containing water
11.9 Second law of up to different heights. The flow continues until the levels of
thermodynamics water in the two tanks are the same. Likewise, in the ‘caloric’
11.10 Reversible and irreversible picture of heat, heat flows until the ‘caloric levels’ (i.e., the
processes temperatures) equalise.
11.11 Carnot engine In time, the picture of heat as a fluid was discarded in
favour of the modern concept of heat as a form of energy. An
Summary
important experiment in this connection was due to Benjamin
Points to ponder
Thomson (also known as Count Rumford) in 1798. He
Exercises
observed that boring of a brass cannon generated a lot of
heat, indeed enough to boil water. More significantly, the
amount of heat produced depended on the work done (by the
horses employed for turning the drill) but not on the
sharpness of the drill. In the caloric picture, a sharper drill
would scoop out more heat fluid from the pores; but this
was not observed. A most natural explanation of the
observations was that heat was a form of energy and the
experiment demonstrated conversion of energy from one form
to another–from work to heat.
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 227
Thermodynamics is the branch of physics that in a different context : we say the state of a system
deals with the concepts of heat and temperature is an equilibrium state if the macroscopic
and the inter-conversion of heat and other forms variables that characterise the system do not
of energy. Thermodynamics is a macroscopic change in time. For example, a gas inside a closed
science. It deals with bulk systems and does not rigid container, completely insulated from its
go into the molecular constitution of matter. In surroundings, with fixed values of pressure,
fact, its concepts and laws were formulated in the volume, temperature, mass and composition that
nineteenth century before the molecular picture do not change with time, is in a state of
of matter was firmly established. Thermodynamic thermodynamic equilibrium.
description involves relatively few macroscopic
variables of the system, which are suggested by
common sense and can be usually measured
directly. A microscopic description of a gas, for
example, would involve specifying the co-ordinates
and velocities of the huge number of molecules
constituting the gas. The description in kinetic
theory of gases is not so detailed but it does involve
molecular distribution of velocities.
Thermodynamic description of a gas, on the other (a)
hand, avoids the molecular description altogether.
Instead, the state of a gas in thermodynamics is
specified by macroscopic variables such as
pressure, volume, temperature, mass and
composition that are felt by our sense perceptions
and are measurable*.
The distinction between mechanics and
thermodynamics is worth bearing in mind. In
mechanics, our interest is in the motion of particles (b)
or bodies under the action of forces and torques.
Fig. 11.1 (a) Systems A and B (two gases) separated
Thermodynamics is not concerned with the by an adiabatic wall – an insulating wall
motion of the system as a whole. It is concerned that does not allow flow of heat. (b) The
with the internal macroscopic state of the body. same systems A and B separated by a
When a bullet is fired from a gun, what changes diathermic wall – a conducting wall that
is the mechanical state of the bullet (its kinetic allows heat to flow from one to another. In
this case, thermal equilibrium is attained
energy, in particular), not its temperature. When
in due course.
the bullet pierces a wood and stops, the kinetic
energy of the bullet gets converted into heat, In general, whether or not a system is in a state
changing the temperature of the bullet and the of equilibrium depends on the surroundings and
surrounding layers of wood. Temperature is the nature of the wall that separates the system
related to the energy of the internal (disordered) from the surroundings. Consider two gases A and
motion of the bullet, not to the motion of the bullet B occupying two different containers. We know
as a whole. experimentally that pressure and volume of a
given mass of gas can be chosen to be its two
11.2 THERMAL EQUILIBRIUM
independent variables. Let the pressure and
Equilibrium in mechanics means that the net volume of the gases be (P , V ) and (P , V )
A A B B
external force and torque on a system are zero. respectively. Suppose first that the two systems
The term ‘equilibrium’ in thermodynamics appears are put in proximity but are separated by an
* Thermodynamics may also involve other variables that are not so obvious to our senses e.g. entropy, enthalpy,
etc., and they are all macroscopic variables. However, a thermodynamic state is specified by five state
variables viz., pressure, volume, temperature, internal energy and entropy. Entropy is a measure of disorderness
in the system. Enthalpy is a measure of total heat content of the system.
2024-25228 PHYSICS
adiabatic wall – an insulating wall (can be law in 1931 long after the first and second Laws
movable) that does not allow flow of energy (heat) of thermodynamics were stated and so numbered.
from one to another. The systems are insulated The Zeroth Law clearly suggests that when two
from the rest of the surroundings also by similar systems A and B, are in thermal equilibrium,
adiabatic walls. The situation is shown there must be a physical quantity that has the
schematically in Fig. 11.1 (a). In this case, it is same value for both. This thermodynamic
found that any possible pair of values (P , V ) will variable whose value is equal for two systems in
A A
be in equilibrium with any possible pair of values thermal equilibrium is called temperature (T).
(P , V ). Next, suppose that the adiabatic wall is Thus, if A and B are separately in equilibrium
B B
replaced by a diathermic wall–a conducting wall
with C, T = T and T = T . This implies that
A C B C
that allows energy flow (heat) from one to another.
T = T i.e. the systems A and B are also in
A B
It is then found that the macroscopic variables of
thermal equilibrium.
the systems A and B change spontaneously until
We have arrived at the concept of temperature
both the systems attain equilibrium states. After
formally via the Zeroth Law. The next question
that there is no change in their states. The
is :how to assign numerical values to
situation is shown in Fig. 11.1(b). The pressure
temperatures of different bodies ? In other words,
and volume variables of the two gases change to
how do we construct a scale of temperature ?
(P ′, V ′) and (P ′, V ′) such that the new states
B B A A Thermometry deals with this basic question to
of A and B are in equilibrium with each other*.
which we turn in the next section.
There is no more energy flow from one to another.
We then say that the system A is in thermal
equilibrium with the system B.
What characterises the situation of thermal
equilibrium between two systems ? You can guess
the answer from your experience. In thermal
equilibrium, the temperatures of the two systems
are equal. We shall see how does one arrive at the
concept of temperature in thermodynamics? The
Zeroth law of thermodynamics provides the clue.
11.3 ZEROTH LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS (a)
Imagine two systems A and B, separated by an
adiabatic wall, while each is in contact with a third
system C, via a conducting wall [Fig. 11.2(a)]. The
states of the systems (i.e., their macroscopic
variables) will change until both A and B come to
thermal equilibrium with C. After this is achieved,
suppose that the adiabatic wall between A and B
is replaced by a conducting wall and C is insulated
from A and B by an adiabatic wall [Fig.11.2(b)]. It
is found that the states of A and B change no (b)
further i.e. they are found to be in thermal
Fig. 11.2 (a) Systems A and B are separated by an
equilibrium with each other. This observation
adiabatic wall, while each is in contact
forms the basis of the Zeroth Law of with a third system C via a conducting
Thermodynamics, which states that ‘two wall. (b) The adiabatic wall between A
systems in thermal equilibrium with a third and B is replaced by a conducting wall,
system separately are in thermal equilibrium while C is insulated from A and B by an
adiabatic wall.
with each other’. R.H. Fowler formulated this
* Both the variables need not change. It depends on the constraints. For instance, if the gases are in containers
of fixed volume, only the pressures of the gases would change to achieve thermal equilibrium.
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 229
11.4 HEAT, INTERNAL ENERGY AND WORK associated with various random motions of its
The Zeroth Law of Thermodynamics led us to molecules. We will see in the next chapter that
the concept of temperature that agrees with our in a gas this motion is not only translational
commonsense notion. Temperature is a marker (i.e. motion from one point to another in the
of the ‘hotness’ of a body. It determines the volume of the container); it also includes
rotational and vibrational motion of the
direction of flow of heat when two bodies are
molecules (Fig. 11.3).
placed in thermal contact. Heat flows from the
body at a higher temperature to the one at lower
temperature. The flow stops when the
temperatures equalise; the two bodies are then
in thermal equilibrium. We saw in some detail
how to construct temperature scales to assign
temperatures to different bodies. We now
describe the concepts of heat and other relevant
quantities like internal energy and work. Fig. 11.3 (a) Internal energy U of a gas is the sum
of the kinetic and potential energies of its
The concept of internal energy of a system is
molecules when the box is at rest. Kinetic
not difficult to understand. We know that every
energy due to various types of motion
bulk system consists of a large number of
(translational, rotational, vibrational) is to
molecules. Internal energy is simply the sum of be included in U. (b) If the same box is
the kinetic energies and potential energies of moving as a whole with some velocity,
these molecules. We remarked earlier that in the kinetic energy of the box is not to be
thermodynamics, the kinetic energy of the included in U.
system, as a whole, is not relevant. Internal
energy is thus, the sum of molecular kinetic and
potential energies in the frame of reference
relative to which the centre of mass of the system
is at rest. Thus, it includes only the (disordered)
energy associated with the random motion of
molecules of the system. We denote the internal
energy of a system by U.
Though we have invoked the molecular
picture to understand the meaning of internal
energy, as far as thermodynamics is concerned,
U is simply a macroscopic variable of the system.
The important thing about internal energy is
that it depends only on the state of the system,
not on how that state was achieved. Internal
energy U of a system is an example of a
thermodynamic ‘state variable’ – its value
depends only on the given state of the system,
not on history i.e. not on the ‘path’ taken to arrive
at that state. Thus, the internal energy of a given
mass of gas depends on its state described by Fig. 11.4 Heat and work are two distinct modes of
specific values of pressure, volume and energy transfer to a system that results in
temperature. It does not depend on how this change in its internal energy. (a) Heat is
energy transfer due to temperature
state of the gas came about. Pressure, volume,
difference between the system and the
temperature, and internal energy are
surroundings. (b) Work is energy transfer
thermodynamic state variables of the system
brought about by means (e.g. moving the
(gas) (see section 11.7). If we neglect the small
piston by raising or lowering some weight
intermolecular forces in a gas, the internal connected to it) that do not involve such a
energy of a gas is just the sum of kinetic energies temperature difference.
2024-25230 PHYSICS
What are the ways of changing internal 11.5 FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
energy of a system ? Consider again, for
We have seen that the internal energy U of a
simplicity, the system to be a certain mass of
system can change through two modes of energy
gas contained in a cylinder with a movable
transfer : heat and work. Let
piston as shown in Fig. 11.4. Experience shows
∆Q = Heat supplied to the system by the
there are two ways of changing the state of the
surroundings
gas (and hence its internal energy). One way is
to put the cylinder in contact with a body at a ∆W = Work done by the system on the
higher temperature than that of the gas. The surroundings
temperature difference will cause a flow of ∆U = Change in internal energy of the system
energy (heat) from the hotter body to the gas, The general principle of conservation of
thus increasing the internal energy of the gas. energy then implies that
The other way is to push the piston down i.e. to
∆Q = ∆U + ∆W (11.1)
do work on the system, which again results in
i.e. the energy (∆Q) supplied to the system goes
increasing the internal energy of the gas. Of
in partly to increase the internal energy of the
course, both these things could happen in the
system (∆U) and the rest in work on the
reverse direction. With surroundings at a lower
environment (∆W). Equation (11.1) is known as
temperature, heat would flow from the gas to
the First Law of Thermodynamics. It is simply
the surroundings. Likewise, the gas could push
the general law of conservation of energy applied
the piston up and do work on the surroundings.
to any system in which the energy transfer from
In short, heat and work are two different modes
or to the surroundings is taken into account.
of altering the state of a thermodynamic system
Let us put Eq. (11.1) in the alternative form
and changing its internal energy.
The notion of heat should be carefully ∆Q – ∆W = ∆U (11.2)
distinguished from the notion of internal energy.
Heat is certainly energy, but it is the energy in Now, the system may go from an initial state
transit. This is not just a play of words. The to the final state in a number of ways. For
distinction is of basic significance. The state of example, to change the state of a gas from
(P , V ) to (P , V ), we can first change the
a thermodynamic system is characterised by its
1 1 2 2
volume of the gas from V to V , keeping its
internal energy, not heat. A statement like ‘a 1 2
pressure constant i.e. we can first go the state
gas in a given state has a certain amount of
(P , V ) and then change the pressure of the
heat’ is as meaningless as the statement that 1 2
gas from P to P , keeping volume constant, to
‘a gas in a given state has a certain amount 1 2
take the gas to (P , V ). Alternatively, we can
of work’. In contrast, ‘a gas in a given state 2 2
first keep the volume constant and then keep
has a certain amount of internal energy’ is a
the pressure constant. Since U is a state
perfectly meaningful statement. Similarly, the
variable, ∆U depends only on the initial and
statements ‘a certain amount of heat is
final states and not on the path taken by the
supplied to the system’ or ‘a certain amount
gas to go from one to the other. However, ∆Q
of work was done by the system’ are perfectly and ∆W will, in general, depend on the path
meaningful. taken to go from the initial to final states. From
To summarise, heat and work in the First Law of Thermodynamics, Eq. (11.2),
thermodynamics are not state variables. They it is clear that the combination ∆Q – ∆W, is
are modes of energy transfer to a system however, path independent. This shows that
resulting in change in its internal energy, if a system is taken through a process in which
∆U = 0 (for example, isothermal expansion of
which, as already mentioned, is a state variable.
an ideal gas, see section 11.8),
In ordinary language, we often confuse heat
with internal energy. The distinction between ∆Q = ∆W
them is sometimes ignored in elementary
physics books. For proper understanding of i.e., heat supplied to the system is used up
thermodynamics, however, the distinction is entirely by the system in doing work on the
crucial. environment.
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 231
If the system is a gas in a cylinder with a If the amount of substance is specified in
movable piston, the gas in moving the piston does terms of moles µ (instead of mass m in kg), we
work. Since force is pressure times area, and can define heat capacity per mole of the
area times displacement is volume, work done substance by
by the system against a constant pressure P is
S 1 ∆Q
∆W = P ∆V C = µ= µ∆T (11.6)
C is known as molar specific heat capacity of
where ∆V is the change in volume of the gas.
the substance. Like s, C is independent of the
Thus, for this case, Eq. (11.1) gives
amount of substance. C depends on the nature
∆Q = ∆U + P∆V (11.3) of the substance, its temperature and the
conditions under which heat is supplied. The
As an application of Eq. (11.3), consider the unit of C is J mo1–1 K–1. As we shall see later (in
change in internal energy for 1 g of water when connection with specific heat capacity of gases),
we go from its liquid to vapour phase. The additional conditions may be needed to define
measured latent heat of water is 2256 J/g. i.e., C or s. The idea in defining C is that simple
for 1 g of water ∆Q = 2256 J. At atmospheric predictions can be made in regard to molar
pressure, 1 g of water has a volume 1 cm3 in specific heat capacities.
liquid phase and 1671 cm3 in vapour phase. Table 11.1 lists measured specific and molar
heat capacities of solids at atmospheric pressure
Therefore,
and ordinary room temperature.
∆W =P(V –V) = 1.013 ×105 × (1671 × 10–6) =169.2 J We will see in Chapter 12 that predictions of
g l specific heats of gases generally agree with
Equation (11.3) then gives experiment. We can use the same law of
equipartition of energy that we use there to
∆U = 2256 – 169.2 = 2086.8 J
predict molar specific heat capacities of solids
We see that most of the heat goes to increase (See Section 12.5 and 12.6). Consider a solid of
the internal energy of water in transition from N atoms, each vibrating about its mean
the liquid to the vapour phase. position. An oscillator in one dimension has
11.6 SPECIFIC HEAT CAPACITY average energy of 2 × ½ k T = k T. In three
B B
dimensions, the average energy is 3 k T.
Suppose an amount of heat ∆Q supplied to a B
For a mole of a solid, the total energy is
substance changes its temperature from T to
T + ∆T. We define heat capacity of a substance U = 3 k T × N = 3 RT (∵ k T × N = R)
B A B A
(see Chapter 10) to be
Now, at constant pressure, ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V ≅
∆Q ∆U, since for a solid ∆V is negligible. Therefore,
S = (11.4)
∆T ∆Q ∆U
We expect ∆Q and, therefore, heat capacity S C = = = 3R (11.7)
∆T ∆T
to be proportional to the mass of the substance.
Table 11.1 Specific and molar heat capacities
Further, it could also depend on the
of some solids at room
temperature, i.e., a different amount of heat may
temperature and atmospheric
be needed for a unit rise in temperature at
pressure
different temperatures. To define a constant
Speci"c–v heat Molar speci"c
characteristic of the substance and Substance
(J kg–1 K–1) heat (J mol–1 K–1)
independent of its amount, we divide S by the
mass of the substance m in kg :
S  1 ∆Q
s = m =  m ∆T (11.5)
s is known as the specific heat capacity of the
substance. It depends on the nature of the
As Table 11.1 shows, the experimentally
substance and its temperature. The unit of
specific heat capacity is J kg–1 K–1. measured values which generally agrees with
2024-25232 PHYSICS
predicted value 3R at ordinary temperatures. ideal gas, we have a simple relation.
(Carbon is an exception.) The agreement is
C – C = R (11.8)
known to break down at low temperatures. p v
Specific heat capacity of water where C and C are molar specific heat
p v
capacities of an ideal gas at constant pressure
The old unit of heat was calorie. One calorie
and volume respectively and R is the universal
was earlier defined to be the amount of heat
gas constant. To prove the relation, we begin
required to raise the temperature of 1g of water
with Eq. (11.3) for 1 mole of the gas :
by 1°C. With more precise measurements, it was
found that the specific heat of water varies ∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V
slightly with temperature. Figure 11.5 shows
If ∆Q is absorbed at constant volume, ∆V = 0
this variation in the temperature range 0 to
100 °C.
∆Q ∆U ∆U
C =   =   =  
v ∆T ∆T  ∆T  (11.9)
v v
where the subscript v is dropped in the last
step, since U of an ideal gas depends only on
temperature. (The subscript denotes the
quantity kept fixed.) If, on the other hand, ∆Q
is absorbed at constant pressure,
∆Q ∆U ∆V
C =   =   + P 
p ∆T  ∆T  ∆T (11.10)
p p p
The subscript p can be dropped from the
Fig. 11.5 Variation of specific heat capacity of
first term since U of an ideal gas depends only
water with temperature.
on T. Now, for a mole of an ideal gas
For a precise definition of calorie, it was,
PV = RT
therefore, necessary to specify the unit
temperature interval. One calorie is defined which gives
to be the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of 1g of water from 14.5 °C to ∆V
P   = R
15.5°C. Since heat is just a form of energy, ∆T (11.11)
p
it is preferable to use the unit joule, J.
In SI units, the specific heat capacity of water Equations (11.9) to (11.11) give the desired
is 4186 J kg–1 K–1 i.e. 4.186 J g–1 K–1. The so relation, Eq. (11.8).
called mechanical equivalent of heat defined
11.7THERMODYNAMIC STATE VARIABLES
as the amount of work needed to produce
AND EQUATION OF STATE
1 cal of heat is in fact just a conversion factor
between two different units of energy: calorie Every equilibrium state of a thermodynamic
to joule. Since in SI units, we use the unit joule system is completely described by specific
for heat, work or any other form of energy, the values of some macroscopic variables, also
term mechanical equivalent is now called state variables. For example, an
superfluous and need not be used. equilibrium state of a gas is completely
As already remarked, the specific heat specified by the values of pressure, volume,
capacity depends on the process or the temperature, and mass (and composition if
conditions under which heat capacity transfer there is a mixture of gases). A thermodynamic
takes place. For gases, for example, we can system is not always in equilibrium. For example,
define two specific heats : specific heat a gas allowed to expand freely against vacuum
capacity at constant volume and specific is not an equilibrium state [Fig. 11.6(a)]. During
heat capacity at constant pressure. For an the rapid expansion, pressure of the gas may
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 233
not be uniform throughout. Similarly, a mixture temperature do not. To decide which variable is
of gases undergoing an explosive chemical extensive and which intensive, think of a
reaction (e.g. a mixture of petrol vapour and relevant system in equilibrium, and imagine that
air when ignited by a spark) is not an it is divided into two equal parts. The variables
that remain unchanged for each part are
equilibrium state; again its temperature and
intensive. The variables whose values get halved
pressure are not uniform [Fig. 11.6(b)].
in each part are extensive. It is easily seen, for
Eventually, the gas attains a uniform
example, that internal energy U, volume V, total
temperature and pressure and comes to
mass M are extensive variables. Pressure P,
thermal and mechanical equilibrium with its
temperature T, and density ρ are intensive
surroundings.
variables. It is a good practice to check the
consistency of thermodynamic equations using
this classification of variables. For example, in
the equation
∆Q = ∆U + P ∆V
quantities on both sides are extensive*. (The
product of an intensive variable like P and an
extensive quantity ∆V is extensive.)
11.8 THERMODYNAMIC PROCESSES
11.8.1 Quasi-static process
Consider a gas in thermal and mechanical
equilibrium with its surroundings. The pressure
of the gas in that case equals the external
Fig. 11.6 (a) The partition in the box is suddenly pressure and its temperature is the same as
removed leading to free expansion of the that of its surroundings. Suppose that the
gas. (b) A mixture of gases undergoing an external pressure is suddenly reduced (say by
explosive chemical reaction. In both
lifting the weight on the movable piston in the
situations, the gas is not in equilibrium and
container). The piston will accelerate outward.
cannot be described by state variables.
During the process, the gas passes through
In short, thermodynamic state variables states that are not equilibrium states. The non-
describe equilibrium states of systems. The equilibrium states do not have well-defined
various state variables are not necessarily pressure and temperature. In the same way, if
independent. The connection between the state a finite temperature difference exists between
variables is called the equation of state. For the gas and its surroundings, there will be a
example, for an ideal gas, the equation of state rapid exchange of heat during which the gas
is the ideal gas relation will pass through non-equilibrium states. In
due course, the gas will settle to an equilibrium
P V = µ R T
state with well-defined temperature and
For a fixed amount of the gas i.e. given µ, there pressure equal to those of the surroundings. The
are thus, only two independent variables, say P free expansion of a gas in vacuum and a mixture
and V or T and V. The pressure-volume curve of gases undergoing an explosive chemical
for a fixed temperature is called an isotherm. reaction, mentioned in section 11.7 are also
Real gases may have more complicated examples where the system goes through non-
equations of state. equilibrium states.
The thermodynamic state variables are of two Non-equilibrium states of a system are difficult
kinds: extensive and intensive. Extensive to deal with. It is, therefore, convenient to
variables indicate the ‘size’ of the system. imagine an idealised process in which at every
Intensive variables such as pressure and stage the system is an equilibrium state. Such a
* As emphasised earlier, Q is not a state variable. However, ∆Q is clearly proportional to the total mass of
system and hence is extensive.
2024-25234 PHYSICS
process is, in principle, infinitely slow, hence the A process in which the temperature of the
name quasi-static (meaning nearly static). The system is kept fixed throughout is called an
system changes its variables (P, T, V) so slowly isothermal process. The expansion of a gas in
that it remains in thermal and mechanical a metallic cylinder placed in a large reservoir of
equilibrium with its surroundings throughout. fixed temperature is an example of an isothermal
In a quasi-static process, at every stage, the process. (Heat transferred from the reservoir to
difference in the pressure of the system and the the system does not materially affect the
external pressure is infinitesimally small. The temperature of the reservoir, because of its very
large heat capacity.) In isobaric processes the
same is true of the temperature difference
pressure is constant while in isochoric
between the system and its surroundings
processes the volume is constant. Finally, if the
(Fig.11.7). To take a gas from the state (P, T) to
system is insulated from the surroundings and
another state (P ′, T ′ ) via a quasi-static process,
no heat flows between the system and the
we change the external pressure by a very small
surroundings, the process is adiabatic. The
amount, allow the system to equalise its pressure
definitions of these special processes are
with that of the surroundings and continue the
summarised in Table. 11.2
process infinitely slowly until the system
achieves the pressure P ′. Similarly, to change Table 11.2 Some special thermodynamic
the temperature, we introduce an infinitesimal processes
temperature difference between the system and
the surrounding reservoirs and by choosing
reservoirs of progressively different temperatures
T to T ′, the system achieves the temperature T ′.
We now consider these processes in some detail:
11.8.2 Isothermal process
For an isothermal process (T fixed), the ideal gas
equation gives
PV = constant
i.e., pressure of a given mass of gas varies inversely
as its volume. This is nothing but Boyle’s Law.
Suppose an ideal gas goes isothermally (at
temperature T) from its initial state (P , V ) to
1 1
Fig. 11.7 In a quasi-static process, the temperature the final state (P , V ). At any intermediate stage
2 2
of the surrounding reservoir and the with pressure P and volume change from V to
external pressure differ only infinitesimally V + ∆V (∆V small)
from the temperature and pressure of the
system. ∆W = P ∆ V
A quasi-static process is obviously a Taking (∆V → 0) and summing the quantity
hypothetical construct. In practice, processes ∆W over the entire process,
that are sufficiently slow and do not involve
V
2
accelerated motion of the piston, large W = ∫ P dV
temperature gradient, etc., are reasonably V
1
approximation to an ideal quasi-static process.
V
We shall from now on deal with quasi-static = µ RT ∫2 dV = µRT In V 2
processes only, except when stated otherwise. V V (11.12)
V 1
1
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 235
where in the second step we have made use of We can calculate, as before, the work done in
the ideal gas equation PV = µ RT and taken the an adiabatic change of an ideal gas from the
constants out of the integral. For an ideal gas, state (P , V , T ) to the state (P , V , T ).
1 1 1 2 2 2
internal energy depends only on temperature.
V
Thus, there is no change in the internal energy 2
W = ∫ P dV
of an ideal gas in an isothermal process. The
V
First Law of Thermodynamics then implies that 1
heat supplied to the gas equals the work done
by the gas : Q = W. Note from Eq. (11.12) that
for V > V , W > 0; and for V < V , W < 0. That
2 1 2 1
is, in an isothermal expansion, the gas absorbs
heat and does work while in an isothermal
(11.15)
compression, work is done on the gas by the
environment and heat is released.
From Eq. (11.14), the constant is P V γ or P V γ
1 1 2 2
11.8.3 Adiabatic process
In an adiabatic process, the system is insulated W = 1  P 2V 2γ − P 1V 1γ 
from the surroundings and heat absorbed or 1 − γV γ−1 Vγ−1
2 1
released is zero. From Eq. (11.1), we see that
work done by the gas results in decrease in its = 1 [ P V −PV ] = µR(T 1 −T 2) (11.16)
internal energy (and hence its temperature for 1 − γ 2 2 1 1 γ −1
an ideal gas). We quote without proof (the result
that you will learn in higher courses) that for As expected, if work is done by the gas in an
an adiabatic process of an ideal gas. adiabatic process (W > 0), from Eq. (11.16),
T < T . On the other hand, if work is done on
P V γ = const (11.13) 2 1
the gas (W < 0), we get T > T i.e., the
where γ is the ratio of specific heats (ordinary 2 1
temperature of the gas rises.
or molar) at constant pressure and at constant
volume. 11.8.4 Isochoric process
C
p In an isochoric process, V is constant. No work
γ=
C is done on or by the gas. From Eq. (11.1), the
v
heat absorbed by the gas goes entirely to change
Thus if an ideal gas undergoes a change in
its internal energy and its temperature. The
its state adiabatically from (P , V ) to (P , V ) :
1 1 2 2 change in temperature for a given amount of
P
Vγ
= P
Vγ
(11.14) heat is determined by the specific heat of the
1 1 2 2
gas at constant volume.
Figure11.8 shows the P-V curves of an ideal
gas for two adiabatic processes connecting two 11.8.5 Isobaric process
isotherms.
In an isobaric process, P is fixed. Work done by
the gas is
W = P (V – V ) = µ R (T – T ) (11.17)
2 1 2 1
Since temperature changes, so does internal
energy. The heat absorbed goes partly to
increase internal energy and partly to do work.
The change in temperature for a given amount
of heat is determined by the specific heat of the
gas at constant pressure.
11.8.6 Cyclic process
In a cyclic process, the system returns to its
initial state. Since internal energy is a state
Fig. 11.8 P-V curves for isothermal and adiabatic
variable, ∆U = 0 for a cyclic process. From
processes of an ideal gas.
2024-25236 PHYSICS
Eq. (11.1), the total heat absorbed equals the 11.10 REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE
work done by the system. PROCESSES
Imagine some process in which a thermodynamic
11.9 SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
system goes from an initial state i to a final state
The First Law of Thermodynamics is the
f. During the process the system absorbs heat Q
principle of conservation of energy. Common
from the surroundings and performs work W on
experience shows that there are many
it. Can we reverse this process and bring both
conceivable processes that are perfectly
the system and surroundings to their initial
allowed by the First Law and yet are never
states with no other effect anywhere? Experience
observed. For example, nobody has ever seen
suggests that for most processes in nature this
a book lying on a table jumping to a height by
is not possible. The spontaneous processes of
itself. But such a thing would be possible if
nature are irreversible. Several examples can be
the principle of conservation of energy were
cited. The base of a vessel on an oven is hotter
the only restriction. The table could cool
than its other parts. When the vessel is removed,
spontaneously, converting some of its internal
heat is transferred from the base to the other
energy into an equal amount of mechanical
parts, bringing the vessel to a uniform
energy of the book, which would then hop to a
height with potential energy equal to the temperature (which in due course cools to the
mechanical energy it acquired. But this never temperature of the surroundings). The process
happens. Clearly, some additional basic cannot be reversed; a part of the vessel will not
principle of nature forbids the above, even get cooler spontaneously and warm up the base.
though it satisfies the energy conservation It will violate the Second Law of Thermodynamics,
principle. This principle, which disallows if it did. The free expansion of a gas is irreversible.
many phenomena consistent with the First The combustion reaction of a mixture of petrol
Law of Thermodynamics is known as the and air ignited by a spark cannot be reversed.
Second Law of Thermodynamics. Cooking gas leaking from a gas cylinder in the
The Second Law of Thermodynamics gives kitchen diffuses to the entire room. The diffusion
a fundamental limitation to the efficiency of a process will not spontaneously reverse and bring
heat engine and the co-efficient of the gas back to the cylinder. The stirring of a
performance of a refrigerator. In simple terms, liquid in thermal contact with a reservoir will
it says that efficiency of a heat engine can convert the work done into heat, increasing the
never be unity. For a refrigerator, the Second
internal energy of the reservoir. The process
Law says that the co-efficient of performance
cannot be reversed exactly; otherwise it would
can never be infinite. The following two
amount to conversion of heat entirely into work,
statements, one due to Kelvin and Planck
violating the Second Law of Thermodynamics.
denying the possibility of a perfect heat engine,
Irreversibility is a rule rather an exception
and another due to Clausius denying the
in nature.
possibility of a perfect refrigerator or heat
Irreversibility arises mainly from two causes:
pump, are a concise summary of these
one, many processes (like a free expansion, or
observations.
an explosive chemical reaction) take the system
Kelvin-Planck statement to non-equilibrium states; two, most processes
No process is possible whose sole result is the involve friction, viscosity and other dissipative
absorption of heat from a reservoir and the effects (e.g., a moving body coming to a stop and
complete conversion of the heat into work. losing its mechanical energy as heat to the floor
and the body; a rotating blade in a liquid coming
Clausius statement
to a stop due to viscosity and losing its
No process is possible whose sole result is the
mechanical energy with corresponding gain in
transfer of heat from a colder object to a
the internal energy of the liquid). Since
hotter object.
dissipative effects are present everywhere and
It can be proved that the two statements
can be minimised but not fully eliminated, most
above are completely equivalent.
processes that we deal with are irreversible.
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 237
A thermodynamic process (state i → state f ) in a reversible heat engine operating between
is reversible if the process can be turned back two temperatures, heat should be absorbed
such that both the system and the surroundings (from the hot reservoir) isothermally and
return to their original states, with no other released (to the cold reservoir) isothermally. We
change anywhere else in the universe. From the thus have identified two steps of the reversible
preceding discussion, a reversible process is an heat engine : isothermal process at temperature
idealised notion. A process is reversible only if T absorbing heat Q from the hot reservoir, and
1 1
another isothermal process at temperature T
it is quasi-static (system in equilibrium with the 2
releasing heat Q to the cold reservoir. To
surroundings at every stage) and there are no 2
complete a cycle, we need to take the system
dissipative effects. For example, a quasi-static
from temperature T to T and then back from
isothermal expansion of an ideal gas in a 1 2
temperature T to T . Which processes should
cylinder fitted with a frictionless movable piston 2 1
we employ for this purpose that are reversible?
is a reversible process.
A little reflection shows that we can only adopt
Why is reversibility such a basic concept in
reversible adiabatic processes for these
thermodynamics? As we have seen, one of the
purposes, which involve no heat flow from any
concerns of thermodynamics is the efficiency
reservoir. If we employ any other process that is
with which heat can be converted into work.
not adiabatic, say an isochoric process, to take
The Second Law of Thermodynamics rules out
the system from one temperature to another, we
the possibility of a perfect heat engine with 100%
shall need a series of reservoirs in the
efficiency. But what is the highest efficiency
temperature range T to T to ensure that at each
possible for a heat engine working between two 2 1
stage the process is quasi-static. (Remember
reservoirs at temperatures T and T ? It turns
1 2 again that for a process to be quasi-static and
out that a heat engine based on idealised
reversible, there should be no finite temperature
reversible processes achieves the highest
difference between the system and the reservoir.)
efficiency possible. All other engines involving
But we are considering a reversible engine that
irreversibility in any way (as would be the case
operates between only two temperatures. Thus
for practical engines) have lower than this
adiabatic processes must bring about the
limiting efficiency.
temperature change in the system from T to T
1 2
and T to T in this engine.
11.11 CARNOT ENGINE 2 1
Suppose we have a hot reservoir at temperature
T and a cold reservoir at temperature T . What
1 2
is the maximum efficiency possible for a heat
engine operating between the two reservoirs and
what cycle of processes should be adopted to
achieve the maximum efficiency ? Sadi Carnot,
a French engineer, first considered this question
in 1824. Interestingly, Carnot arrived at the
correct answer, even though the basic concepts
of heat and thermodynamics had yet to be firmly
established.
We expect the ideal engine operating between
two temperatures to be a reversible engine.
Irreversibility is associated with dissipative
Fig. 11.9 Carnot cycle for a heat engine with an
effects, as remarked in the preceding section,
ideal gas as the working substance.
and lowers efficiency. A process is reversible if
it is quasi-static and non-dissipative. We have A reversible heat engine operating between
seen that a process is not quasi-static if it two temperatures is called a Carnot engine. We
involves finite temperature difference between have just argued that such an engine must have
the system and the reservoir. This implies that the following sequence of steps constituting one
2024-25238 PHYSICS
cycle, called the Carnot cycle, shown in
 
Fig. 11.9. We have taken the working substance In V 3
of the Carnot engine to be an ideal gas. T  V 
= 1 −  2 4
(a) Step 1 → 2Isothermal expansion of the gas
T 1  V 2

(11.23)
InV 
taking its state from (P , V , T ) to 1
1 1 1
(P , V , T ).
2 2 1 Now since step 2 → 3 is an adiabatic process,
The heat absorbed by the gas (Q ) from the
reservoir at temperature T 1 is 1 given by T V γ−1 =T V γ−1
Eq. (11.12). This is also the work done (W ) 1 2 2 3
1 → 2
by the gas on the environment.
 1/(γ−1)
W = Q = µ R T ln
 V 2
 (11.18)
i.e. V V2 = T T2  (11.24)
1 → 2 1 1 V  3 1
1
(b) Step 2 → 3Adiabatic expansion of the gas
Similarly, since step 4 → 1 is an adiabatic
from (P , V , T ) to (P , V , T )
2 2 1 3 3 2 process
Work done by the gas, using
Eq. (11.16), is T V
γ−1
=T
Vγ−1
2 4 1 1
( )
W 2→3 = µR γT 1 − 1−T 2 (11.19) i.e. V 1 =  T 2 1/γ−1 (11.25)
V T 
4 1
(c) Step 3 → 4Isothermal compression of the
gas from (P , V , T ) to (P , V , T ). From Eqs. (11.24) and (11.25),
3 3 2 4 4 2
Heat released (Q ) by the gas to the reservoir V 3 V 2
2 = (11.26)
at temperature T is given by Eq. (11.12). This V V
2 4 1
is also the work done (W ) on the gas by the
3 → 4
environment. Using Eq. (11.26) in Eq. (11.23), we get
V 
W 3 → 4 =Q 2 =µRT 2ln  V3  (11.20) η = 1 − T 2 (Carnot engine) (11.27)
4 T
1
(d) Step 4 → 1Adiabatic compression of the
gas from (P , V , T ) to (P ,V , T ). We have already seen that a Carnot engine
4 4 2 1 1 1
is a reversible engine. Indeed it is the only
Work done on the gas, [using Eq.(11.16), is
reversible engine possible that works between
two reservoirs at different temperatures. Each
T −T 
W 4 → 1 =µR  1 γ-12  (11.21) step of the Carnot cycle given in Fig. 11.9 can
be reversed. This will amount to taking heat Q
2
from the cold reservoir at T , doing work W on
From Eqs. (11.18) to (11.21) total work done
2
by the gas in one complete cycle is the system, and transferring heat Q to the hot
1
reservoir. This will be a reversible refrigerator.
W = W + W – W – W
1 → 2 2 → 3 3 → 4 4 → 1 We next establish the important result
    (sometimes called Carnot’s theorem) that
V V
= µ RT ln  2 – µ RT ln 3  (11.22) (a) working between two given temperatures T
1 V  2 V  1
1 4 and T of the hot and cold reservoirs respectively,
2
The efficiency η of the Carnot engine is no engine can have efficiency more than that of
the Carnot engine and (b) the efficiency of the
W Q
η = = 1 − 2 Carnot engine is independent of the nature of
Q Q
1 1 the working substance.
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 239
To prove the result (a), imagine a reversible reservoir and delivers the same amount of work
(Carnot) engine R and an irreversible engine I in one cycle, without any change in the source
working between the same source (hot reservoir) or anywhere else. This is clearly against the
and sink (cold reservoir). Let us couple the Kelvin-Planck statement of the Second Law of
engines, I and R, in such a way so that I acts Thermodynamics. Hence the assertion η > η
I R
like a heat engine and R acts as a refrigerator. is wrong. No engine can have efficiency greater
Let I absorb heat Q from the source, deliver than that of the Carnot engine. A similar
work W ′ and release
1
the heat Q - W′ to the sink. argument can be constructed to show that a
1
We arrange so that R returns the same heat Q reversible engine with one particular substance
1
to the source, taking heat Q from the sink and cannot be more efficient than the one using
2
requiring work W = Q – Q to be done on it. another substance. The maximum efficiency of
1 2
Now suppose η < η i.e. if R were to act a Carnot engine given by Eq. (11.27) is
R I
as an engine it would give less work output independent of the nature of the system
performing the Carnot cycle of operations. Thus
we are justified in using an ideal gas as a system
in the calculation of efficiency η of a Carnot
engine. The ideal gas has a simple equation of
I
state, which allows us to readily calculate η, but
the final result for η, [Eq. (11.27)], is true for
any Carnot engine.
R
This final remark shows that in a Carnot
cycle,
Q T
W 1 = 1 (11.28)
Q T
2 2
is a universal relation independent of the nature
Fig. 11.10 An irreversible engine (I) coupled to a
of the system. Here Q and Q are respectively,
reversible refrigerator (R). If W ′ > W, this 1 2
the heat absorbed and released isothermally
would amount to extraction of heat
(from the hot and to the cold reservoirs) in a
W′ – W from the sink and its full
Carnot engine. Equation (11.28), can, therefore,
conversion to work, in contradiction with
the Second Law of Thermodynamics. be used as a relation to define a truly universal
thermodynamic temperature scale that is
than that of I i.e. W < W′ for a given Q . With R independent of any particular properties of the
1
acting like a refrigerator, this would mean system used in the Carnot cycle. Of course, for
Q = Q – W > Q – W ′. Thus, on the whole, an ideal gas as a working substance, this
2 1 1
the coupled I-R system extracts heat universal temperature is the same as the ideal
(Q – W) – (Q – W ′) = (W ′ – W) from the cold gas temperature introduced in section 11.9.
1 1
SUMMARY
1. The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that ‘two systems in thermal equilibrium with a
third system separately are in thermal equilibrium with each other’. The Zeroth Law leads
to the concept of temperature.
2. Internal energy of a system is the sum of kinetic energies and potential energies of the
molecular constituents of the system. It does not include the over-all kinetic energy of
the system. Heat and work are two modes of energy transfer to the system. Heat is the
energy transfer arising due to temperature difference between the system and the
surroundings. Work is energy transfer brought about by other means, such as moving
the piston of a cylinder containing the gas, by raising or lowering some weight connected
to it.
2024-25240 PHYSICS
3. The first law of thermodynamics is the general law of conservation of energy applied to
any system in which energy transfer from or to the surroundings (through heat and
work) is taken into account. It states that
∆Q = ∆U + ∆W
where ∆Q is the heat supplied to the system, ∆W is the work done by the system and ∆U
is the change in internal energy of the system.
4. The specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
1 ∆Q
s =
m ∆T
where m is the mass of the substance and ∆Q is the heat required to change its
temperature by ∆T. The molar specific heat capacity of a substance is defined by
1 ∆Q
C =
µ∆T
where µ is the number of moles of the substance. For a solid, the law of equipartition
of energy gives
C = 3 R
which generally agrees with experiment at ordinary temperatures.
Calorie is the old unit of heat. 1 calorie is the amount of heat required to raise the
temperature of 1 g of water from 14.5 °C to 15.5 °C. 1 cal = 4.186 J.
5. For an ideal gas, the molar specific heat capacities at constant pressure and volume
satisfy the relation
C – C = R
p v
where R is the universal gas constant.
6. Equilibrium states of a thermodynamic system are described by state variables. The
value of a state variable depends only on the particular state, not on the path used to
arrive at that state. Examples of state variables are pressure (P), volume (V), temperature
(T), and mass (m). Heat and work are not state variables. An Equation of State (like
the ideal gas equation PV = µ RT) is a relation connecting different state variables.
7. A quasi-static process is an infinitely slow process such that the system remains in
thermal and mechanical equilibrium with the surroundings throughout. In a
quasi-static process, the pressure and temperature of the environment can differ from
those of the system only infinitesimally.
8. In an isothermal expansion of an ideal gas from volume V to V at temperature T the
1 2
heat absorbed (Q) equals the work done (W) by the gas, each given by
V 
Q = W = µ R T ln  V 12  
9. In an adiabatic process of an ideal gas
γ
PV = constant
C
γ= p
where
C
v
Work done by an ideal gas in an adiabatic change of state from (P , V , T ) to (P , V , T )
1 1 1 2 2 2
is
µ R ( T −T )
W = 1 2
γ – 1
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 241
10. The second law of thermodynamics disallows some processes consistent with the First
Law of Thermodynamics. It states
Kelvin-Planck statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the absorption of heat from a reservoir and
complete conversion of the heat into work.
Clausius statement
No process is possible whose sole result is the transfer of heat from a colder object to a
hotter object.
Put simply, the Second Law implies that no heat engine can have efficiency η equal to
1 or no refrigerator can have co-efficient of performance α equal to infinity.
11. A process is reversible if it can be reversed such that both the system and the surroundings
return to their original states, with no other change anywhere else in the universe.
Spontaneous processes of nature are irreversible. The idealised reversible process is a
quasi-static process with no dissipative factors such as friction, viscosity, etc.
12. Carnot engine is a reversible engine operating between two temperatures T (source) and
1
T (sink). The Carnot cycle consists of two isothermal processes connected by two
2
adiabatic processes. The efficiency of a Carnot engine is given by
T
η = 1 − 2
(Carnot engine)
T
1
No engine operating between two temperatures can have efficiency greater than that of
the Carnot engine.
13. If Q > 0, heat is added to the system
If Q < 0, heat is removed to the system
If W > 0, Work is done by the system
If W < 0, Work is done on the system
Quantity Symbol Dimensions Unit Remark
Co-efficienty of volume α [K–1] K–1 α = 3 α
v v 1
expansion
Heat supplied to a system ∆Q [ML2 T–2] J Q is not a state
variable
Specific heat capacity s [L2 T–2 K–1] J kg–1 K–1
dt
Thermal Conductivity K [MLT–3 K–1] J s–1 K–1 H = – KA
dx
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Temperature of a body is related to its average internal energy, not to the kinetic energy
of motion of its centre of mass. A bullet fired from a gun is not at a higher temperature
because of its high speed.
2. Equilibrium in thermodynamics refers to the situation when macroscopic variables
describing the thermodynamic state of a system do not depend on time. Equilibrium of
a system in mechanics means the net external force and torque on the system are zero.
2024-25242 PHYSICS
3. In a state of thermodynamic equilibrium, the microscopic constituents of a system are
not in equilibrium (in the sense of mechanics).
4. Heat capacity, in general, depends on the process the system goes through when heat is
supplied.
5. In isothermal quasi-static processes, heat is absorbed or given out by the system even
though at every stage the gas has the same temperature as that of the surrounding
reservoir. This is possible because of the infinitesimal difference in temperature between
the system and the reservoir.
EXERCISES
11.1 A geyser heats water flowing at the rate of 3.0 litres per minute from 27 °C to 77 °C.
If the geyser operates on a gas burner, what is the rate of consumption of the fuel if
its heat of combustion is 4.0 × 104 J/g ?
11.2 What amount of heat must be supplied to 2.0 × 10–2 kg of nitrogen (at room
temperature) to raise its temperature by 45 °C at constant pressure ? (Molecular
mass of N = 28; R = 8.3 J mol–1 K–1.)
2
11.3 Explain why
(a) Two bodies at different temperatures T and T if brought in thermal contact do
1 2
not necessarily settle to the mean temperature (T + T )/2.
1 2
(b) The coolant in a chemical or a nuclear plant (i.e., the liquid used to prevent
the different parts of a plant from getting too hot) should have high
specific heat.
(c) Air pressure in a car tyre increases during driving.
(d) The climate of a harbour town is more temperate than that of a town in a desert
at the same latitude.
11.4 A cylinder with a movable piston contains 3 moles of hydrogen at standard temperature
and pressure. The walls of the cylinder are made of a heat insulator, and the piston
is insulated by having a pile of sand on it. By what factor does the pressure of the
gas increase if the gas is compressed to half its original volume ?
11.5 In changing the state of a gas adiabatically from an equilibrium state A to another
equilibrium state B, an amount of work equal to 22.3 J is done on the system. If the
gas is taken from state A to B via a process in which the net heat absorbed by the
system is 9.35 cal, how much is the net work done by the system in the latter case ?
(Take 1 cal = 4.19 J)
11.6 Two cylinders A and B of equal capacity are connected to each other via a stopcock.
A contains a gas at standard temperature and pressure. B is completely evacuated.
The entire system is thermally insulated. The stopcock is suddenly opened. Answer
the following :
(a) What is the final pressure of the gas in A and B ?
(b) What is the change in internal energy of the gas ?
(c) What is the change in the temperature of the gas ?
(d) Do the intermediate states of the system (before settling to the final equilibrium
state) lie on its P-V-T surface ?
11.7 An electric heater supplies heat to a system at a rate of 100W. If system performs
work at a rate of 75 joules per second. At what rate is the internal
energy increasing?
2024-25THERMODYNAMICS 243
11.8 A thermodynamic system is taken from an original state to an intermediate state by
the linear process shown in Fig. (11.13)
Fig. 11.11
Its volume is then reduced to the original value from E to F by an isobaric process.
Calculate the total work done by the gas from D to E to F
2024-25