C N
HAPTER INE
M P F
ECHANICAL ROPERTIES OF LUIDS
9.1 INTRODUCTION
In this chapter, we shall study some common physical
properties of liquids and gases. Liquids and gases can flow
9.1 Introduction and are therefore, called fluids. It is this property that
9.2 Pressure distinguishes liquids and gases from solids in a basic way.
9.3 Streamline flow Fluids are everywhere around us. Earth has an envelop of
9.4 Bernoulli’s principle air and two-thirds of its surface is covered with water. Water
is not only necessary for our existence; every mammalian
9.5 Viscosity
body constitute mostly of water. All the processes occurring
9.6 Surface tension
in living beings including plants are mediated by fluids. Thus
Summary understanding the behaviour and properties of fluids is
Points to ponder important.
Exercises How are fluids different from solids? What is common in
Additional exercises liquids and gases? Unlike a solid, a fluid has no definite
Appendix shape of its own. Solids and liquids have a fixed volume,
whereas a gas fills the entire volume of its container. We
have learnt in the previous chapter that the volume of solids
can be changed by stress. The volume of solid, liquid or gas
depends on the stress or pressure acting on it. When we
talk about fixed volume of solid or liquid, we mean its volume
under atmospheric pressure. The difference between gases
and solids or liquids is that for solids or liquids the change
in volume due to change of external pressure is rather small.
In other words solids and liquids have much lower
compressibility as compared to gases.
Shear stress can change the shape of a solid keeping its
volume fixed. The key property of fluids is that they offer
very little resistance to shear stress; their shape changes by
application of very small shear stress. The shearing stress
of fluids is about million times smaller than that of solids.
9.2 PRESSURE
A sharp needle when pressed against our skin pierces it. Our
skin, however, remains intact when a blunt object with a
wider contact area (say the back of a spoon) is pressed against
it with the same force. If an elephant were to step on a man’s
chest, his ribs would crack. A circus performer across whose
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 181
chest a large, light but strong wooden plank is In principle, the piston area can be made
placed first, is saved from this accident. Such arbitrarily small. The pressure is then defined
everyday experiences convince us that both the in a limiting sense as
force and its coverage area are important. Smaller D F
lim
the area on which the force acts, greater is the P = (9.2)
∆A→0 D A
impact. This impact is known as pressure.
Pressure is a scalar quantity. We remind the
When an object is submerged in a fluid at
reader that it is the component of the force
rest, the fluid exerts a force on its surface. This normal to the area under consideration and not
force is always normal to the object’s surface. the (vector) force that appears in the numerator
This is so because if there were a component of in Eqs. (9.1) and (9.2). Its dimensions are
force parallel to the surface, the object will also [ML–1T–2]. The SI unit of pressure is N m–2. It has
exert a force on the fluid parallel to it; as a been named as pascal (Pa) in honour of the
consequence of Newton’s third law. This force French scientist Blaise Pascal (1623-1662) who
will cause the fluid to flow parallel to the surface. carried out pioneering studies on fluid pressure.
Since the fluid is at rest, this cannot happen. A common unit of pressure is the atmosphere
Hence, the force exerted by the fluid at rest has (atm), i.e. the pressure exerted by the
to be perpendicular to the surface in contact atmosphere at sea level (1 atm = 1.013 × 105 Pa).
with it. This is shown in Fig.9.1(a). Another quantity, that is indispensable in
The normal force exerted by the fluid at a point describing fluids, is the density ρ. For a fluid of
may be measured. An idealised form of one such mass m occupying volume V,
pressure-measuring device is shown in Fig. m
ρ= (9.3)
9.1(b). It consists of an evacuated chamber with V
a spring that is calibrated to measure the force The dimensions of density are [ML–3]. Its SI
acting on the piston. This device is placed at a unit is kg m–3. It is a positive scalar quantity. A
point inside the fluid. The inward force exerted liquid is largely incompressible and its density
by the fluid on the piston is balanced by the is therefore, nearly constant at all pressures.
outward spring force and is thereby measured. Gases, on the other hand exhibit a large
variation in densities with pressure.
The density of water at 4oC (277 K) is
1.0 × 103 kg m–3. The relative density of a
substance is the ratio of its density to the
density of water at 4oC. It is a dimensionless
positive scalar quantity. For example the relative
density of aluminium is 2.7. Its density is
2.7 × 103 kg m–3 The densities of some common
.
fluids are displayed in Table 9.1.
Table 9.1 Densities of some common fluids
(a) (b) at STP*
Fig. 9.1 (a) The force exerted by the liquid in the
beaker on the submerged object or on the
walls is normal (perpendicular) to the
surface at all points.
(b) An idealised device for measuring
pressure.
If F is the magnitude of this normal force on the
piston of area A then the average pressure P
av
is defined as the normal force acting per unit
area.
F
P = (9.1)
av A
* STP means standard temperature (00C) and 1 atm pressure.
2024-25182 PHYSICS
this element of area corresponding to the normal
⊳ Example 9.1 The two thigh bones (femurs),
forces F , F and F as shown in Fig. 9.2 on the
each of cross-sectional area10 cm2 support a b c
faces BEFC, ADFC and ADEB denoted by A , A
the upper part of a human body of mass 40 a b
and A respectively. Then
kg. Estimate the average pressure c
F sinθ = F, F cosθ = F (by equilibrium)
sustained by the femurs. b c b a
A sinθ = A , A cosθ = A (by geometry)
b c b a
Thus,
Answer Total cross-sectional area of the
F F F
femurs is A = 2 × 10 cm2 = 20 × 10–4 m2. The b = c = a ; P =P =P
force acting on them is F = 40kg wt = 400 N A A A b c a (9.4)
b c a
(taking g = 10 m s–2). This force is acting
Hence, pressure exerted is same in all
vertically down and hence, normally on the
directions in a fluid at rest. It again reminds us
femurs. Thus, the average pressure is
that like other types of stress, pressure is not a
F vector quantity. No direction can be assigned
P
av
=
A
= 2 × 105 N m−2 ⊳
to it. The force against any area within (or
bounding) a fluid at rest and under pressure is
9.2.1 Pascal’s Law normal to the area, regardless of the orientation
of the area.
The French scientist Blaise Pascal observed that
Now consider a fluid element in the form of a
the pressure in a fluid at rest is the same at all
horizontal bar of uniform cross-section. The bar
points if they are at the same height. This fact
is in equilibrium. The horizontal forces exerted
may be demonstrated in a simple way.
at its two ends must be balanced or the
pressure at the two ends should be equal. This
proves that for a liquid in equilibrium the
pressure is same at all points in a horizontal
plane. Suppose the pressure were not equal in
different parts of the fluid, then there would be
a flow as the fluid will have some net force
acting on it. Hence in the absence of flow the
pressure in the fluid must be same everywhere
in a horizontal plane.
9.2.2 Variation of Pressure with Depth
Fig. 9.2 Proof of Pascal’s law. ABC-DEF is an Consider a fluid at rest in a container. In
element of the interior of a fluid at rest. Fig. 9.3 point 1 is at height h above a point 2.
This element is in the form of a right- The pressures at points 1 and 2 are P and P
angled prism. The element is small so that 1 2
respectively. Consider a cylindrical element of
the effect of gravity can be ignored, but it
fluid having area of base A and height h. As the
has been enlarged for the sake of clarity.
fluid is at rest the resultant horizontal forces
Fig. 9.2 shows an element in the interior of a should be zero and the resultant vertical forces
fluid at rest. This element ABC-DEF is in the should balance the weight of the element. The
form of a right-angled prism. In principle, this forces acting in the vertical direction are due to
prismatic element is very small so that every the fluid pressure at the top (P A) acting
1
part of it can be considered at the same depth downward, at the bottom (P A) acting upward.
2
from the liquid surface and therefore, the effect If mg is weight of the fluid in the cylinder we
of the gravity is the same at all these points. have
But for clarity we have enlarged this element. (P − P ) A = mg (9.5)
2 1
The forces on this element are those exerted by Now, if ρ is the mass density of the fluid, we
the rest of the fluid and they must be normal to have the mass of fluid to be m = ρV= ρhA so
the surfaces of the element as discussed above. that
Thus, the fluid exerts pressures P, P and P on P −P = ρgh (9.6)
a b c 2 1
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 183
Fig 9.4 Illustration of hydrostatic paradox. The
three vessels A, B and C contain different
amounts of liquids, all upto the same
height.
⊳ Example 9.2 What is the pressure on a
swimmer 10 m below the surface of a lake?
Answer Here
Fig.9.3 Fluid under gravity. The effect of gravity is
h = 10 m and ρ = 1000 kg m-3. Take g = 10 m s–2
illustrated through pressure on a vertical
From Eq. (9.7)
cylindrical column.
P =P + ρgh
a
Pressure difference depends on the vertical = 1.01 × 105 Pa + 1000 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 10 m
= 2.01 × 105 Pa
distance h between the points (1 and 2), mass
≈ 2 atm
density of the fluid ρ and acceleration due to
This is a 100% increase in pressure from
gravity g. If the point 1 under discussion is
surface level. At a depth of 1 km, the increase
shifted to the top of the fluid (say, water), which
in pressure is 100 atm! Submarines are designed
is open to the atmosphere, P may be replaced
1 to withstand such enormous pressures. ⊳
by atmospheric pressure (P ) and we replace P
a 2
by P. Then Eq. (9.6) gives 9.2.3 Atmospheric Pressure and
P =P + ρgh (9.7) Gauge Pressure
a
Thus, the pressure P, at depth below the The pressure of the atmosphere at any point is
equal to the weight of a column of air of unit
surface of a liquid open to the atmosphere is
cross-sectional area extending from that point
greater than atmospheric pressure by an
to the top of the atmosphere. At sea level, it is
amount ρgh. The excess of pressure, P −P , at
a 1.013 × 105 Pa (1 atm). Italian scientist
depth h is called a gauge pressure at that point.
Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) devised for
The area of the cylinder is not appearing in
the first time a method for measuring
the expression of absolute pressure in Eq. (9.7).
atmospheric pressure. A long glass tube closed
Thus, the height of the fluid column is important
at one end and filled with mercury is inverted
and not cross-sectional or base area or the shape
into a trough of mercury as shown in Fig.9.5 (a).
of the container. The liquid pressure is the same
This device is known as ‘mercury barometer’.
at all points at the same horizontal level (same The space above the mercury column in the tube
depth). The result is appreciated through the contains only mercury vapour whose pressure
example of hydrostatic paradox. Consider three P is so small that it may be neglected. Thus,
vessels A, B and C [Fig.9.4] of different shapes. the pressure at Point A=0. The pressure inside
They are connected at the bottom by a horizontal the coloumn at Point B must be the same as the
pipe. On filling with water, the level in the three pressure at Point C, which is atmospheric
vessels is the same, though they hold different pressure, P a.
amounts of water. This is so because water at P = ρgh (9.8)
a
where ρ is the density of mercury and h is the
the bottom has the same pressure below each
height of the mercury column in the tube.
section of the vessel.
2024-25184 PHYSICS
In the experiment it is found that the mercury
column in the barometer has a height of about
76 cm at sea level equivalent to one atmosphere
(1 atm). This can also be obtained using the
value of ρ in Eq. (9.8). A common way of stating
pressure is in terms of cm or mm of mercury
(Hg). A pressure equivalent of 1 mm is called a
torr (after Torricelli).
1 torr = 133 Pa.
The mm of Hg and torr are used in medicine
and physiology. In meteorology, a common unit
is the bar and millibar.
1 bar = 105 Pa
An open tube manometer is a useful (b) The open tube manometer
instrument for measuring pressure differences. Fig 9.5 Two pressure measuring devices.
It consists of a U-tube containing a suitable
Pressure is same at the same level on both
liquid i.e., a low density liquid (such as oil) for
sides of the U-tube containing a fluid. For
measuring small pressure differences and a
liquids, the density varies very little over wide
high density liquid (such as mercury) for large
ranges in pressure and temperature and we can
pressure differences. One end of the tube is open
treat it safely as a constant for our present
to the atmosphere and the other end is purposes. Gases on the other hand, exhibits
connected to the system whose pressure we want large variations of densities with changes in
to measure [see Fig. 9.5 (b)]. The pressure P at A pressure and temperature. Unlike gases, liquids
is equal to pressure at point B. What we are, therefore, largely treated as incompressible.
normally measure is the gauge pressure, which
Example 9.3 The density of the
is P − P , given by Eq. (9.8) and is proportional to ⊳
a atmosphere at sea level is 1.29 kg/m3.
manometer height h.
Assume that it does not change with
altitude. Then how high would the
atmosphere extend?
Answer We use Eq. (9.7)
ρgh = 1.29 kg m–3 × 9.8 m s2 × h m = 1.01 × 105 Pa
∴ h = 7989 m ≈ 8 km
In reality the density of air decreases with
height. So does the value of g. The atmospheric
cover extends with decreasing pressure over
100 km. We should also note that the sea level
atmospheric pressure is not always 760 mm of
Hg. A drop in the Hg level by 10 mm or more is a
sign of an approaching storm. ⊳
⊳Example 9.4 At a depth of 1000 m in an
ocean (a) what is the absolute pressure?
(b) What is the gauge pressure? (c) Find
the force acting on the window of area
20 cm × 20 cm of a submarine at this depth,
the interior of which is maintained at sea-
level atmospheric pressure. (The density of
sea water is 1.03 × 103 kg m-3,
g = 10 m s–2.)
Fig 9.5 (a) The mercury barometer.
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 185
Answer Here h = 1000 m and ρ = 1.03 × 103 kg m-3. law. In these devices, fluids are used for
(a) From Eq. (9.6), absolute pressure transmitting pressure. In a hydraulic lift, as
P =P + ρgh shown in Fig. 9.6 (b), two pistons are separated
a
= 1.01 × 105 Pa by the space filled with a liquid. A piston of small
+ 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 m s–2 × 1000 m cross-section A is used to exert a force F directly
1 1
F
= 104.01 × 105 Pa 1
≈ 104 atm on the liquid. The pressure P = A is
1
(b) Gauge pressure is P −P = ρgh = P transmitted throughout the liquid to the larger
a g
P = 1.03 × 103 kg m–3 × 10 ms2 × 1000 m cylinder attached with a larger piston of area A ,
g 2
= 103 × 105 Pa which results in an upward force of P × A .
2
≈ 103 atm Therefore, the piston is capable of supporting a
(c) The pressure outside the submarine is large force (large weight of, say a car, or a truck,
P =P + ρgh and the pressure inside it is P . F A
Hen ca e, the net pressure acting on tha e placed on the platform) F = PA = 1 A 2 . By
window is gauge pressure, P = ρgh. Since 2 2 1
g
the area of the window is A = 0.04 m2, the changing the force at A , the platform can be
1
force acting on it is moved up or down. Thus, the applied force has
F = P A = 103 × 105 Pa × 0.04 m2 = 4.12 × 105 N A
g 2
⊳ been increased by a factor of A and this factor
1
is the mechanical advantage of the device. The
9.2.4 Hydraulic Machines
example below clarifies it.
Let us now consider what happens when we
change the pressure on a fluid contained in a
vessel. Consider a horizontal cylinder with a
piston and three vertical tubes at different points
[Fig. 9.6 (a)]. The pressure in the horizontal
cylinder is indicated by the height of liquid
column in the vertical tubes. It is necessarily
the same in all. If we push the piston, the fluid
level rises in all the tubes, again reaching the
same level in each one of them.
Fig 9.6 (b) Schematic diagram illustrating the principle
behind the hydraulic lift, a device used
to lift heavy loads.
Fig 9.6 (a) Whenever external pressure is applied Example 9.5 Two syringes of different
on any part of a fluid in a vessel, it is ⊳ cross-sections (without needles) filled with
equally transmitted in all directions. water are connected with a tightly fitted
rubber tube filled with water. Diameters of
This indicates that when the pressure on the
the smaller piston and larger piston are
cylinder was increased, it was distributed
1.0 cm and 3.0 cm respectively. (a) Find
uniformly throughout. We can say whenever
the force exerted on the larger piston when
external pressure is applied on any part of a
a force of 10 N is applied to the smaller
fluid contained in a vessel, it is transmitted
piston. (b) If the smaller piston is pushed
undiminished and equally in all directions.
in through 6.0 cm, how much does the
This is another form of the Pascal’s law and it
larger piston move out?
has many applications in daily life.
A number of devices, such as hydraulic lift Answer (a) Since pressure is transmitted
and hydraulic brakes, are based on the Pascal’s undiminished throughout the fluid,
2024-25186 PHYSICS
A
p ( 3/2· 10–2m) 2 important advantage of the system is that the
F 2 = A 12 F 1 = p ( 1/2· 10–2m) 2 · 10N p eqre us as lu lyr e t s oe t a u llp c b yy li p nr de es rs si n ag t p tae cd ha el dis t tr oa n thsm e i ft ot ued r
wheels so that the braking effort is equal on
= 90 N
all wheels.
(b) Water is considered to be perfectly
incompressible. Volume covered by the
9.3 STREAMLINE FLOW
movement of smaller piston inwards is equal to
volume moved outwards due to the larger piston. So far we have studied fluids at rest. The study
L A = L A of the fluids in motion is known as fluid
1 1 2 2
dynamics. When a water tap is turned on slowly,
the water flow is smooth initially, but loses its
smoothness when the speed of the outflow is
increased. In studying the motion of fluids, we
j 0.67 × 10-2 m = 0.67 cm focus our attention on what is happening to
Note, atmospheric pressure is common to both various fluid particles at a particular point in
pistons and has been ignored. ⊳ space at a particular time. The flow of the fluid
is said to be steady if at any given point, the
⊳ Example 9.6 In a car lift compressed air velocity of each passing fluid particle remains
exerts a force F on a small piston having constant in time. This does not mean that the
1
a radius of 5.0 cm. This pressure is velocity at different points in space is same. The
transmitted to a second piston of radius velocity of a particular particle may change as it
15 cm (Fig 9.7). If the mass of the car to be moves from one point to another. That is, at some
lifted is 1350 kg, calculate F . What is the other point the particle may have a different
1
pressure necessary to accomplish this velocity, but every other particle which passes
task? (g = 9.8 ms-2). the second point behaves exactly as the previous
particle that has just passed that point. Each
Answer Since pressure is transmitted particle follows a smooth path, and the paths of
undiminished throughout the fluid, the particles do not cross each other.
= 1470 N
≈ 1.5 × 103 N
The air pressure that will produce this
force is
This is almost double the atmospheric
pressure. ⊳
Fig. 9.7 The meaning of streamlines. (a) A typical
Hydraulic brakes in automobiles also work on trajectory of a fluid particle.
the same principle. When we apply a little force (b) A region of streamline flow.
on the pedal with our foot the master piston
moves inside the master cylinder, and the The path taken by a fluid particle under a
pressure caused is transmitted through the steady flow is a streamline. It is defined as a
brake oil to act on a piston of larger area. A large curve whose tangent at any point is in the
force acts on the piston and is pushed down direction of the fluid velocity at that point.
expanding the brake shoes against brake lining. Consider the path of a particle as shown in
In this way, a small force on the pedal produces Fig.9.7 (a), the curve describes how a fluid
a large retarding force on the wheel. An particle moves with time. The curve PQ is like a
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 187
permanent map of fluid flow, indicating how the but their directions are parallel. Figure 9.8 (b)
fluid streams. No two streamlines can cross, for gives a sketch of turbulent flow.
if they do, an oncoming fluid particle can go
either one way or the other and the flow would
not be steady. Hence, in steady flow, the map of
flow is stationary in time. How do we draw closely
spaced streamlines ? If we intend to show
streamline of every flowing particle, we would
end up with a continuum of lines. Consider planes
perpendicular to the direction of fluid flow e.g.,
at three points P, R and Q in Fig.9.7 (b). The plane
Fig. 9.8 (a) Some streamlines for fluid flow.
pieces are so chosen that their boundaries be
(b) A jet of air striking a flat plate placed
determined by the same set of streamlines. This
perpendicular to it. This is an example
means that number of fluid particles crossing
of turbulent flow.
the surfaces as indicated at P, R and Q is the
same. If area of cross-sections at these points
9.4 BERNOULLI’S PRINCIPLE
are A ,A and A and speeds of fluid particles
P R Q
are v , v and v , then mass of fluid ∆m crossing Fluid flow is a complex phenomenon. But we
P R Q P
at A in a small interval of time ∆t is ρ A v ∆t. can obtain some useful properties for steady
P P P P
Similarly mass of fluid ∆m flowing or crossing or streamline flows using the conservation
R
at A in a small interval of time ∆t is ρ A v ∆t of energy.
R R R R
and mass of fluid ∆m is ρ A v ∆t crossing at Consider a fluid moving in a pipe of varying
Q Q Q Q
A . The mass of liquid flowing out equals the cross-sectional area. Let the pipe be at varying
Q
mass flowing in, holds in all cases. Therefore, heights as shown in Fig. 9.9. We now suppose
ρ A v ∆t = ρ A v ∆t = ρ A v ∆t (9.9) that an incompressible fluid is flowing through
P P P R R R Q Q Q
For flow of incompressible fluids the pipe in a steady flow. Its velocity must
ρ = ρ = ρ change as a consequence of equation of
P R Q
Equation (9.9) reduces to continuity. A force is required to produce this
A v = A v = A v (9.10) acceleration, which is caused by the fluid
P P R R Q Q
which is called the equation of continuity and surrounding it, the pressure must be different
it is a statement of conservation of mass in flow in different regions. Bernoulli’s equation is a
of incompressible fluids. In general general expression that relates the pressure
Av = constant (9.11) difference between two points in a pipe to both
Av gives the volume flux or flow rate and velocity changes (kinetic energy change) and
remains constant throughout the pipe of flow. elevation (height) changes (potential energy
Thus, at narrower portions where the change). The Swiss Physicist Daniel Bernoulli
streamlines are closely spaced, velocity developed this relationship in 1738.
increases and its vice versa. From (Fig 9.7b) it Consider the flow at two regions 1 (i.e., BC)
is clear that A > A or v < v , the fluid is and 2 (i.e., DE). Consider the fluid initially lying
R Q R Q
accelerated while passing from R to Q. This is between B and D. In an infinitesimal time
associated with a change in pressure in fluid interval ∆t, this fluid would have moved. Suppose
flow in horizontal pipes. v is the speed at B and v at D, then fluid initially
1 2
Steady flow is achieved at low flow speeds. at B has moved a distance v ∆t to C (v ∆t is small
1 1
Beyond a limiting value, called critical speed, enough to assume constant cross-section along
this flow loses steadiness and becomes BC). In the same interval ∆t the fluid initially at
turbulent. One sees this when a fast flowing D moves to E, a distance equal to v ∆t. Pressures
2
stream encounters rocks, small foamy P and P act as shown on the plane faces of
1 2
whirlpool-like regions called ‘white water areas A and A binding the two regions. The
1 2
rapids are formed. work done on the fluid at left end (BC) is W =
1
Figure 9.8 displays streamlines for some P A (v ∆t) = P ∆V. Since the same volume ∆V
typical flows. For example, Fig. 9.8(a) describes p1 as1 se1 s throu1 gh both the regions (from the
a laminar flow where the velocities at different
equation of continuity) the work done by the fluid
points in the fluid may have different magnitudes
at the other end (DE) is W = P A (v ∆t) = P ∆V or,
2 2 2 2 2
2024-25188 PHYSICS
the work done on the fluid is –P ∆V. So the total In words, the Bernoulli’s relation may be
2
work done on the fluid is stated as follows: As we move along a streamline
W – W = (P − P ) ∆V the sum of the pressure (P), the kinetic energy
1 2 1 2
Part of this work goes into changing the kinetic
(cid:230) r v2(cid:246)
energy of the fluid, and part goes into changing
the gravitational potential energy. If the density
per unit volume Ł(cid:231)
2
ł(cid:247) and the potential energy
of the fluid is ρ and ∆m = ρA v ∆t = ρ∆V is the
1 1 per unit volume (ρgh) remains a constant.
mass passing through the pipe in time ∆t, then
Note that in applying the energy conservation
change in gravitational potential energy is
principle, there is an assumption that no energy
∆U = ρg∆V (h − h )
2 1 is lost due to friction. But in fact, when fluids
The change in its kinetic energy is
flow, some energy does get lost due to internal
1 friction. This arises due to the fact that in a fluid
∆K = ρ ∆V (v 2 − v 2) flow, the different layers of the fluid flow with
2 2 1
different velocities. These layers exert frictional
We can employ the work – energy theorem
forces on each other resulting in a loss of energy.
(Chapter 6) to this volume of the fluid and
This property of the fluid is called viscosity and
this yields
is discussed in more detail in a later section. The
1 lost kinetic energy of the fluid gets converted into
(P − P ) ∆V = ρ ∆V (v 2 − v 2) + ρg∆V (h − h ) heat energy. Thus, Bernoulli’s equation ideally
1 2 2 2 1 2 1
applies to fluids with zero viscosity or non-
We now divide each term by ∆V to obtain viscous fluids. Another restriction on application
of Bernoulli theorem is that the fluids must be
1 incompressible, as the elastic energy of the fluid
(P 1− P 2) =
2
ρ (v 22 − v 12) + ρg (h
2
− h 1)
is also not taken into consideration. In practice,
it has a large number of useful applications and
We can rearrange the above terms to obtain
can help explain a wide variety of phenomena
1 1
P + ρv 2 + ρgh = P + ρv 2 + ρgh
for low viscosity incompressible fluids.
1 2 1 1 2 2 2 2 Bernoulli’s equation also does not hold for non-
(9.12) steady or turbulent flows, because in that
This is Bernoulli’s equation. Since 1 and 2 situation velocity and pressure are constantly
refer to any two locations along the pipeline, we fluctuating in time.
may write the expression in general as When a fluid is at rest i.e., its velocity is zero
1
everywhere, Bernoulli’s equation becomes
P + ρv2 + ρgh = constant (9.13) P + ρgh = P + ρgh
2
1 1 2 2
(P − P ) = ρg (h − h )
1 2 2 1
which is same as Eq. (9.6).
9.4.1 Speed of Efflux: Torricelli’s Law
The word efflux means fluid outflow. Torricelli
discovered that the speed of efflux from an open
tank is given by a formula identical to that of a
freely falling body. Consider a tank containing
a liquid of density ρ with a small hole in its side
at a height y from the bottom (see Fig. 9.10).
1
The air above the liquid, whose surface is at
height y , is at pressure P. From the equation of
2
continuity [Eq. (9.10)] we have
Fig. 9.9 The flow of an ideal fluid in a pipe of varying
v A = v A
cross section. The fluid in a section of length 1 1 2 2
v 1∆t moves to the section of length v 2∆t in v = A 1 v
time ∆t. 2 A 1
2
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 189
from its parabolic trajectory as it moves through
air. This deviation can be partly explained on
the basis of Bernoulli’s principle.
(i) Ball moving without spin: Fig. 9.11(a)
shows the streamlines around a
non-spinning ball moving relative to a
fluid. From the symmetry of streamlines
it is clear that the velocity of fluid (air)
above and below the ball at corresponding
points is the same resulting in zero
pressure difference. The air therefore,
exerts no upward or downward force on
the ball.
Fig. 9.10 Torricelli’s law. The speed of efflux, v ,
1 (ii) Ball moving with spin: A ball which is
from the side of the container is given by
the application of Bernoulli’s equation. spinning drags air along with it. If the
If the container is open at the top to the surface is rough more air will be dragged.
atmosphere then v = 2 g h. Fig 9.11(b) shows the streamlines of air
1
for a ball which is moving and spinning
at the same time. The ball is moving
If the cross-sectional area of the tank A is
2 forward and relative to it the air is moving
much larger than that of the hole (A >>A ), then
2 1 backwards. Therefore, the velocity of air
we may take the fluid to be approximately at rest
above the ball relative to the ball is larger
at the top, i.e., v = 0. Now, applying the Bernoulli
2 and below it is smaller (see Section 9.3).
equation at points 1 and 2 and noting that at
the hole P = P , the atmospheric pressure, we The stream lines, thus, get crowded above
1 a
have from Eq. (9.12) and rarified below.
This difference in the velocities of air results
1
P + r v2+ r g y= +Pr g y in the pressure difference between the lower and
a 2 1 1 2
upper faces and there is a net upward force on
Taking y – y = h we have
2 1 the ball. This dynamic lift due to spining is called
( )
2 P - P Magnus effect.
v = 2g h + a (9.14)
1 r
Aerofoil or lift on aircraft wing: Figure 9.11
When P >>P and 2 g h may be ignored, the (c) shows an aerofoil, which is a solid piece
a
speed of efflux is determined by the container shaped to provide an upward dynamic lift
pressure. Such a situation occurs in rocket when it moves horizontally through air. The
propulsion. On the other hand, if the tank is cross-section of the wings of an aeroplane
open to the atmosphere, then P = P and
a looks somewhat like the aerofoil shown in Fig.
v = 2g h (9.15) 9.11 (c) with streamlines around it. When the
1
This is also the speed of a freely falling body. aerofoil moves against the wind, the
Equation (9.15) represents Torricelli’s law. orientation of the wing relative to flow direction
causes the streamlines to crowd together
9.4.2 Dynamic Lift above the wing more than those below it. The
Dynamic lift is the force that acts on a body, flow speed on top is higher than that below it.
such as airplane wing, a hydrofoil or a spinning There is an upward force resulting in a
ball, by virtue of its motion through a fluid. In dynamic lift of the wings and this balances
many games such as cricket, tennis, baseball, the weight of the plane. The following example
or golf, we notice that a spinning ball deviates illustrates this.
2024-25190 PHYSICS
(a) (b) (c)
Fig 9.11 (a) Fluid streaming past a static sphere. (b) Streamlines for a fluid around a sphere spinning clockwise.
(c) Air flowing past an aerofoil.
⊳ v = (v + v )/2 = 960 km/h = 267 m s-1,
Example 9.7 A fully loaded Boeing aircraft av 2 1
has a mass of 3.3 × 105 kg. Its total wing we have
area is 500 m2. It is in level flight with a ( ) D P
speed of 960 km/h. (a) Estimate the v 2 –v 1 /v av = r v2 ≈ 0.08
pressure difference between the lower and av
The speed above the wing needs to be only 8
upper surfaces of the wings (b) Estimate
% higher than that below. ⊳
the fractional increase in the speed of the
air on the upper surface of the wing relative
to the lower surface. [The density of air is ρ 9.5 VISCOSITY
= 1.2 kg m-3]
Most of the fluids are not ideal ones and offer some
resistance to motion. This resistance to fluid motion
is like an internal friction analogous to friction when
Answer (a) The weight of the Boeing aircraft is
a solid moves on a surface. It is called viscosity.
balanced by the upward force due to the
This force exists when there is relative motion
pressure difference
between layers of the liquid. Suppose we consider
∆P × A = 3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8
a fluid like oil enclosed between two glass plates
∆P= (3.3 × 105 kg × 9.8 m s–2) / 500 m2 as shown in Fig. 9.12 (a). The bottom plate is fixed
while the top plate is moved with a constant
= 6.5 ×103 Nm-2
velocity v relative to the fixed plate. If oil is
(b) We ignore the small height difference
replaced by honey, a greater force is required to
between the top and bottom sides in Eq. (9.12).
move the plate with the same velocity. Hence
The pressure difference between them is
we say that honey is more viscous than oil. The
then
fluid in contact with a surface has the same
r ( ) velocity as that of the surfaces. Hence, the layer
D P= v2 –v2
2 2 1 of the liquid in contact with top surface moves
where v is the speed of air over the upper with a velocity v and the layer of the liquid in
2
surface and v is the speed under the bottom contact with the fixed surface is stationary. The
1
surface. velocities of layers increase uniformly from
bottom (zero velocity) to the top layer (velocity
( ) 2D P
v –v = ( ) v). For any layer of liquid, its upper layer pulls
2 1 r v +v
2 1 it forward while lower layer pulls it backward.
Taking the average speed This results in force between the layers. This
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 191
type of flow is known as laminar. The layers of change of strain’ or ‘strain rate’ i.e. ∆x/(l ∆t) or
liquid slide over one another as the pages of a v/l instead of strain itself. The coefficient of
book do when it is placed flat on a table and a viscosity (pronounced ‘eta’) for a fluid is defined
horizontal force is applied to the top cover. When as the ratio of shearing stress to the strain rate.
a fluid is flowing in a pipe or a tube, then velocity
(9.16)
of the liquid layer along the axis of the tube is
maximum and decreases gradually as we move The SI unit of viscosity is poiseiulle (Pl). Its
towards the walls where it becomes zero, other units are N s m-2 or Pa s. The dimensions
Fig. 9.12 (b). The velocity on a cylindrical surface of viscosity are [ML-1T-1]. Generally, thin liquids,
in a tube is constant. like water, alcohol, etc., are less viscous than
thick liquids, like coal tar, blood, glycerine, etc.
The coefficients of viscosity for some common
fluids are listed in Table 9.2. We point out two
facts about blood and water that you may find
interesting. As Table 9.2 indicates, blood is
‘thicker’ (more viscous) than water. Further, the
relative viscosity (η/η ) of blood remains
water
constant between 0 oC and 37 oC.
(a)
Fig. 9.13 Measurement of the coefficient of viscosity
of a liquid.
(b)
Fig 9.12 (a) A layer of liquid sandwiched between The viscosity of liquids decreases with
two parallel glass plates, in which the
temperature, while it increases in the case of gases.
lower plate is fixed and the upper one is
moving to the right with velocity v
(b) velocity distribution for viscous flow in
⊳
Example 9.8 A metal block of area 0.10 m2 is
a pipe.
connected to a 0.010 kg mass via a string
On account of this motion, a portion of liquid, that passes over an ideal pulley (considered
which at some instant has the shape ABCD, massless and frictionless), as in Fig. 9.13.
take the shape of AEFD after short interval of A liquid with a film thickness of 0.30 mm
time (∆t). During this time interval the liquid has is placed between the block and the table.
undergone a shear strain of ∆x/l. Since, the When released the block moves to the right
strain in a flowing fluid increases with time with a constant speed of 0.085 m s-1. Find
continuously. Unlike a solid, here the stress is the coefficient of viscosity of the liquid.
found experimentally to depend on ‘rate of
2024-25192 PHYSICS
Answer The metal block moves to the right This is known as Stokes’ law. We shall not
because of the tension in the string. The tension derive Stokes’ law.
T is equal in magnitude to the weight of the This law is an interesting example of retarding
suspended mass m. Thus, the shear force F is force, which is proportional to velocity. We can
study its consequences on an object falling
F = T = mg = 0.010 kg × 9.8 m s–2 = 9.8 × 10-2 N
through a viscous medium. We consider a
Shear stress on the fluid = F/A = N/m2 raindrop in air. It accelerates initially due to
gravity. As the velocity increases, the retarding
Strain rate = force also increases. Finally, when viscous force
plus buoyant force becomes equal to the force
due to gravity, the net force becomes zero and so
does the acceleration. The sphere (raindrop) then
descends with a constant velocity. Thus, in
= equilibrium, this terminal velocity v is given by
t
6πηav = (4π/3) a3 (ρ-σ)g
= 3.46 ×10-3 Pa s t
where ρ and σ are mass densities of sphere and
⊳
the fluid, respectively. We obtain
Table 9.2 The viscosities of some fluids
v = 2a2 (ρ-σ)g / (9η) (9.18)
t
Fluid T(oC) Viscosity (mPl)
So the terminal velocity v depends on the
t
Water 20 1.0 square of the radius of the sphere and inversely
100 0.3 on the viscosity of the medium.
Blood 37 2.7 You may like to refer back to Example 6.2 in
Machine Oil 16 113 this context.
38 34
Glycerine 20 830 ⊳ Example 9.9 The terminal velocity of a
Honey – 200 copper ball of radius 2.0 mm falling through
Air 0 0.017 a tank of oil at 20oC is 6.5 cm s-1. Compute
the viscosity of the oil at 20oC. Density of
40 0.019
oil is 1.5 ×103 kg m-3, density of copper is
8.9 × 103 kg m-3.
9.5.1 Stokes’ Law
When a body falls through a fluid it drags the
Answer We have v= 6.5 × 10-2 ms-1, a = 2 × 10-3 m,
layer of the fluid in contact with it. A relative t
g = 9.8 ms-2, ρ = 8.9 × 103 kg m-3,
motion between the different layers of the fluid
is set and, as a result, the body experiences a σ =1.5 ×103 kg m-3. From Eq. (9.18)
retarding force. Falling of a raindrop and
swinging of a pendulum bob are some common
examples of such motion. It is seen that the
viscous force is proportional to the velocity of
= 9.9 × 10-1 kg m–1 s–1 ⊳
the object and is opposite to the direction of
motion. The other quantities on which the force
F depends are viscosity η of the fluid and radius 9.6 SURFACE TENSION
a of the sphere. Sir George G. Stokes (1819–
You must have noticed that, oil and water do
1903), an English scientist enunciated clearly
not mix; water wets you and me but not ducks;
the viscous drag force F as
mercury does not wet glass but water sticks to
F=6p h av (9.17) it, oil rises up a cotton wick, inspite of gravity,
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 193
Sap and water rise up to the top of the leaves of Let us consider a molecule near the surface
the tree, hair of a paint brush do not cling Fig. 9.14(b). Only lower half side of it is
together when dry and even when dipped in surrounded by liquid molecules. There is some
water but form a fine tip when taken out of it. negative potential energy due to these, but
All these and many more such experiences are obviously it is less than that of a molecule in
related with the free surfaces of liquids. As bulk, i.e., the one fully inside. Approximately
liquids have no definite shape but have a
it is half of the latter. Thus, molecules on a
definite volume, they acquire a free surface when
liquid surface have some extra energy in
poured in a container. These surfaces possess
comparison to molecules in the interior. A
some additional energy. This phenomenon is
liquid, thus, tends to have the least surface
known as surface tension and it is concerned
area which external conditions permit.
with only liquid as gases do not have free
Increasing surface area requires energy. Most
surfaces. Let us now understand this
surface phenomenon can be understood in
phenomena.
terms of this fact. What is the energy required
for having a molecule at the surface? As
9.6.1 Surface Energy
mentioned above, roughly it is half the energy
A liquid stays together because of attraction required to remove it entirely from the liquid
between molecules. Consider a molecule well
i.e., half the heat of evaporation.
inside a liquid. The intermolecular distances are Finally, what is a surface? Since a liquid
such that it is attracted to all the surrounding consists of molecules moving about, there cannot
molecules [Fig. 9.14(a)]. This attraction results be a perfectly sharp surface. The density of the
in a negative potential energy for the molecule,
liquid molecules drops rapidly to zero around
which depends on the number and distribution z = 0 as we move along the direction indicated
of molecules around the chosen one. But the Fig 9.14 (c) in a distance of the order of a few
average potential energy of all the molecules is molecular sizes.
the same. This is supported by the fact that to
take a collection of such molecules (the liquid) 9.6.2 Surface Energy and Surface Tension
and to disperse them far away from each other As we have discussed that an extra energy is
in order to evaporate or vaporise, the heat of associated with surface of liquids, the creation
evaporation required is quite large. For water it of more surface (spreading of surface) keeping
is of the order of 40 kJ/mol. other things like volume fixed requires a
Fig. 9.14 Schematic picture of molecules in a liquid, at the surface and balance of forces. (a) Molecule inside
a liquid. Forces on a molecule due to others are shown. Direction of arrows indicates attraction of
repulsion. (b) Same, for a molecule at a surface. (c) Balance of attractive (AI and repulsive (R) forces.
2024-25194 PHYSICS
horizontal liquid film ending in bar free to slide We make the following observations from
over parallel guides Fig (9.15). above:
(i) Surface tension is a force per unit length
(or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of the interface between the plane
of the liquid and any other substance; it also
is the extra energy that the molecules at the
interface have as compared to molecules in
the interior.
(ii) At any point on the interface besides the
Fig. 9.15 Stretching a film. (a) A film in equilibrium; boundary, we can draw a line and imagine
(b) The film stretched an extra distance. equal and opposite surface tension forces
Suppose that we move the bar by a small S per unit length of the line acting
distance d as shown. Since the area of the perpendicular to the line, in the plane of
surface increases, the system now has more the interface. The line is in equilibrium. To
energy, this means that some work has been be more specific, imagine a line of atoms or
done against an internal force. Let this internal molecules at the surface. The atoms to the
force be F, the work done by the applied force is left pull the line towards them; those to the
F.d = Fd. From conservation of energy, this is right pull it towards them! This line of
stored as additional energy in the film. If the atoms is in equilibrium under tension. If
surface energy of the film is S per unit area, the the line really marks the end of the
extra area is 2dl. A film has two sides and the interface, as in Figure 9.14 (a) and (b) there
liquid in between, so there are two surfaces and is only the force S per unit length
the extra energy is acting inwards.
Table 9.3 gives the surface tension of various
S (2dl) = Fd (9.19)
liquids. The value of surface tension depends
Or, S=Fd/2dl = F/2l (9.20)
on temperature. Like viscosity, the surface
This quantity S is the magnitude of surface tension of a liquid usually falls with
tension. It is equal to the surface energy per unit temperature.
area of the liquid interface and is also equal to
Table 9.3 Surface tension of some liquids at the
the force per unit length exerted by the fluid on
temperatures indicated with the
the movable bar.
heats of the vaporisation
So far we have talked about the surface of
one liquid. More generally, we need to consider Liquid Temp (oC) Surface Heat of
fluid surface in contact with other fluids or solid Tension vaporisation
(N/m) (kJ/mol)
surfaces. The surface energy in that case
depends on the materials on both sides of the
surface. For example, if the molecules of the Helium –270 0.000239 0.115
materials attract each other, surface energy is
Oxygen –183 0.0132 7.1
reduced while if they repel each other the
Ethanol 20 0.0227 40.6
surface energy is increased. Thus, more
appropriately, the surface energy is the energy Water 20 0.0727 44.16
of the interface between two materials and
Mercury 20 0.4355 63.2
depends on both of them.
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 195
A fluid will stick to a solid surface if the by θ. It is different at interfaces of different pairs
surface energy between fluid and the solid is of liquids and solids. The value of θ determines
smaller than the sum of surface energies whether a liquid will spread on the surface of a
between solid-air, and fluid-air. Now there is solid or it will form droplets on it. For example,
attraction between the solid surface and the water forms droplets on lotus leaf as shown in
liquid. It can be directly measured Fig. 9.17 (a) while spreads over a clean plastic
experimentaly as schematically shown in Fig. plate as shown in Fig. 9.17(b).
9.16. A flat vertical glass plate, below which a
vessel of some liquid is kept, forms one arm of
the balance. The plate is balanced by weights
on the other side, with its horizontal edge just
over water. The vessel is raised slightly till the
liquid just touches the glass plate and pulls it
down a little because of surface tension. Weights
(a)
are added till the plate just clears water.
(b)
Fig. 9.17 Different shapes of water drops with
interfacial tensions (a) on a lotus leaf (b)
on a clean plastic plate.
Fig. 9.16 Measuring Surface Tension.
We consider the three interfacial tensions at
all the three interfaces, liquid-air, solid-air and
Suppose the additional weight required is W.
solid-liquid denoted by S , S and S , respectively
Then from Eq. 9.20 and the discussion given la sa sl
as given in Fig. 9.17 (a) and (b). At the line of
there, the surface tension of the liquid-air
contact, the surface forces between the three media
interface is
must be in equilibrium. From the Fig. 9.17(b) the
S = (W/2l) = (mg/2l) (9.21)
la following relation is easily derived.
where m is the extra mass and l is the length of
S cos θ + S = S (9.22)
the plate edge. The subscript (la) emphasises la sl sa
The angle of contact is an obtuse angle if
the fact that the liquid-air interface tension
S > S as in the case of water-leaf interface
is involved. sl la
while it is an acute angle if S < S as in the
sl la
case of water-plastic interface. When θ is an
9.6.3 Angle of Contact
obtuse angle then molecules of liquids are
The surface of liquid near the plane of contact, attracted strongly to themselves and weakly to
with another medium is in general curved. The those of solid, it costs a lot of energy to create a
angle between tangent to the liquid surface at liquid-solid surface, and liquid then does not
the point of contact and solid surface inside the wet the solid. This is what happens with water
liquid is termed as angle of contact. It is denoted on a waxy or oily surface, and with mercury on
2024-25196 PHYSICS
any surface. On the other hand, if the molecules so that
of the liquid are strongly attracted to those of (P – P ) = (2 S / r) (9.25)
i o la
the solid, this will reduce S and therefore,
sl In general, for a liquid-gas interface, the
cos θ may increase or θ may decrease. In this
convex side has a higher pressure than the
case θ is an acute angle. This is what happens
concave side. For example, an air bubble in a
for water on glass or on plastic and for kerosene
liquid, would have higher pressure inside it.
oil on virtually anything (it just spreads). Soaps,
See Fig 9.18 (b).
detergents and dying substances are wetting
agents. When they are added the angle of
contact becomes small so that these may
penetrate well and become effective. Water
proofing agents on the other hand are added to
create a large angle of contact between the water
and fibres.
9.6.4 Drops and Bubbles Fig. 9.18 Drop, cavity and bubble of radius r.
One consequence of surface tension is that free A bubble Fig 9.18 (c) differs from a drop
liquid drops and bubbles are spherical if effects and a cavity; in this it has two interfaces. Applying
of gravity can be neglected. You must have seen the above argument we have for a bubble
this especially clearly in small drops just formed
(P – P ) = (4 S / r) (9.26)
in a high-speed spray or jet, and in soap bubbles i o la
blown by most of us in childhood. Why are drops This is probably why you have to blow hard,
and bubbles spherical? What keeps soap but not too hard, to form a soap bubble. A little
bubbles stable? extra air pressure is needed inside!
As we have been saying repeatedly, a liquid-
air interface has energy, so for a given volume 9.6.5 Capillary Rise
the surface with minimum energy is the one with
One consequence of the pressure difference
the least area. The sphere has this property.
across a curved liquid-air interface is the well-
Though it is out of the scope of this book, but known effect that water rises up in a narrow
you can check that a sphere is better than at tube in spite of gravity. The word capilla means
least a cube in this respect! So, if gravity and hair in Latin; if the tube were hair thin, the rise
other forces (e.g. air resistance) were ineffective,
would be very large. To see this, consider a
liquid drops would be spherical.
vertical capillary tube of circular cross section
Another interesting consequence of surface
(radius a) inserted into an open vessel of water
tension is that the pressure inside a spherical
(Fig. 9.19). The contact angle between water and
drop Fig. 9.18(a) is more than the pressure
outside. Suppose a spherical drop of radius r is
in equilibrium. If its radius increase by ∆r. The
extra surface energy is
[4π(r + ∆r) 2- 4πr2] S = 8πr ∆r S (9.23)
la la
If the drop is in equilibrium this energy cost is
balanced by the energy gain due to
expansion under the pressure difference (P – P )
i o
between the inside of the bubble and the outside.
The work done is Fig. 9.19 Capillary rise, (a) Schematic picture of a
W = (P – P ) 4πr2∆r (9.24) narrow tube immersed water.
i o (b) Enlarged picture near interface.
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 197
glass is acute. Thus the surface of water in the
⊳ Example 9.10 The lower end of a capillary
capillary is concave. This means that there is
tube of diameter 2.00 mm is dipped 8.00
a pressure difference between the two sides
cm below the surface of water in a beaker.
of the top surface. This is given by What is the pressure required in the tube
in order to blow a hemispherical bubble at
(P – P ) =(2S/r) = 2S/(a sec θ)
i o its end in water? The surface tension of
= (2S/a) cos θ (9.27)
water at temperature of the experiments is
Thus the pressure of the water inside the 7.30 × 10-2 Nm-1. 1 atmospheric pressure =
1.01 × 105 Pa, density of water = 1000 kg/m3,
tube, just at the meniscus (air-water interface)
g = 9.80 m s-2. Also calculate the excess
is less than the atmospheric pressure. Consider
pressure.
the two points A and B in Fig. 9.19(a). They
must be at the same pressure, namely
Answer The excess pressure in a bubble of gas
P + h ρ g = P = P (9.28)
0 i A in a liquid is given by 2S/r, where S is the
where ρρρρρ is the density of water and h is called surface tension of the liquid-gas interface. You
the capillary rise [Fig. 9.19(a)]. Using should note there is only one liquid surface in
Eq. (9.27) and (9.28) we have this case. (For a bubble of liquid in a gas, there
are two liquid surfaces, so the formula for
h ρ g = (P – P ) = (2S cos θ )/a (9.29)
i 0 excess pressure in that case is 4S/r.) The
The discussion here, and the Eqs. (9.24) and radius of the bubble is r. Now the pressure
(9.25) make it clear that the capillary rise is due outside the bubble P equals atmospheric
o
pressure plus the pressure due to 8.00 cm of
to surface tension. It is larger, for a smaller a.
water column. That is
Typically it is of the order of a few cm for fine
P = (1.01 × 105 Pa + 0.08 m × 1000 kg m–3
capillaries. For example, if a = 0.05 cm, using o × 9.80 m s–2)
the value of surface tension for water (Table 9.3), = 1.01784 × 105 Pa
we find that Therefore, the pressure inside the bubble is
h = 2S/(ρ g a) P = P + 2S/r
i o
= 1.01784 × 105 Pa + (2 × 7.3 × 10-2 Pa m/10-3 m)
= 2×(0.073 N m-1) = (1.01784 + 0.00146) × 105 Pa
(103kgm-3)(9.8 ms-2)(5 ×10-4m) = 1.02 × 105 Pa
= 2.98 × 10–2 m = 2.98 cm where the radius of the bubble is taken
to be equal to the radius of the capillary tube,
Notice that if the liquid meniscus is convex,
since the bubble is hemispherical ! (The answer
as for mercury, i.e., if cos θ is negative then from
has been rounded off to three significant figures.)
Eq. (9.28) for example, it is clear that the liquid
The excess pressure in the bubble is 146 Pa.
will be lower in the capillary! ⊳
SUMMARY
1. The basic property of a fluid is that it can flow. The fluid does not have any
resistance to change of its shape. Thus, the shape of a fluid is governed by the
shape of its container.
2. A liquid is incompressible and has a free surface of its own. A gas is compressible
and it expands to occupy all the space available to it.
3. If F is the normal force exerted by a fluid on an area A then the average pressure P
av
is defined as the ratio of the force to area
F
P =
av A
2024-25198 PHYSICS
4. The unit of the pressure is the pascal (Pa). It is the same as N m-2. Other common
units of pressure are
1 atm = 1.01×105 Pa
1 bar = 105 Pa
1 torr = 133 Pa = 0.133 kPa
1 mm of Hg = 1 torr = 133 Pa
5. Pascal’s law states that: Pressure in a fluid at rest is same at all points which are at
the same height. A change in pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted
undiminished to every point of the fluid and the walls of the containing vessel.
6. The pressure in a fluid varies with depth h according to the expression
P = P + ρgh
a
where ρ is the density of the fluid, assumed uniform.
7. The volume of an incompressible fluid passing any point every second in a pipe of
non uniform crossection is the same in the steady flow.
v A = constant ( v is the velocity and A is the area of crossection)
The equation is due to mass conservation in incompressible fluid flow.
8. Bernoulli’s principle states that as we move along a streamline, the sum of the
pressure (P), the kinetic energy per unit volume (ρv2/2) and the potential energy per
unit volume (ρgy) remains a constant.
P + ρv2/2 + ρgy = constant
The equation is basically the conservation of energy applied to non viscuss fluid
motion in steady state. There is no fluid which have zero viscosity, so the above
statement is true only approximately. The viscosity is like friction and converts the
kinetic energy to heat energy.
9. Though shear strain in a fluid does not require shear stress, when a shear stress is
applied to a fluid, the motion is generated which causes a shear strain growing
with time. The ratio of the shear stress to the time rate of shearing strain is known
as coefficient of viscosity, η.
where symbols have their usual meaning and are defined in the text.
10. Stokes’ law states that the viscous drag force F on a sphere of radius a moving with
velocity v through a fluid of viscosity is, F = 6πηav.
11. Surface tension is a force per unit length (or surface energy per unit area) acting in
the plane of interface between the liquid and the bounding surface. It is the extra
energy that the molecules at the interface have as compared to the interior.
POINTS TO PONDER
1. Pressure is a scalar quantity. The definition of the pressure as “force per unit area”
may give one false impression that pressure is a vector. The “force” in the numerator of
the definition is the component of the force normal to the area upon which it is
impressed. While describing fluids as a concept, shift from particle and rigid body
mechanics is required. We are concerned with properties that vary from point to point
in the fluid.
2. One should not think of pressure of a fluid as being exerted only on a solid like the
walls of a container or a piece of solid matter immersed in the fluid. Pressure exists at
all points in a fluid. An element of a fluid (such as the one shown in Fig. 9.4) is in
equilibrium because the pressures exerted on the various faces are equal.
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 199
3. The expression for pressure
P = P + ρgh
a
holds true if fluid is incompressible. Practically speaking it holds for liquids, which
are largely incompressible and hence is a constant with height.
4. The gauge pressure is the difference of the actual pressure and the atmospheric pressure.
P – P = P
a g
Many pressure-measuring devices measure the gauge pressure. These include the tyre
pressure gauge and the blood pressure gauge (sphygmomanometer).
5. A streamline is a map of fluid flow. In a steady flow two streamlines do not intersect as
it means that the fluid particle will have two possible velocities at the point.
6. Bernoulli’s principle does not hold in presence of viscous drag on the fluid. The work
done by this dissipative viscous force must be taken into account in this case, and P
2
[Fig. 9.9] will be lower than the value given by Eq. (9.12).
7. As the temperature rises the atoms of the liquid become more mobile and the coefficient
of viscosity, η falls. In a gas the temperature rise increases the random motion of
atoms and η increases.
8. Surface tension arises due to excess potential energy of the molecules on the surface
in comparison to their potential energy in the interior. Such a surface energy is present
at the interface separating two substances at least one of which is a fluid. It is not the
property of a single fluid alone.
EXERCISES
9.1 Explain why
(a) The blood pressure in humans is greater at the feet than at the brain
(b) Atmospheric pressure at a height of about 6 km decreases to nearly half of
its value at the sea level, though the height of the atmosphere is more than
100 km
(c) Hydrostatic pressure is a scalar quantity even though pressure is force
divided by area.
9.2 Explain why
(a) The angle of contact of mercury with glass is obtuse, while that of water
with glass is acute.
(b) Water on a clean glass surface tends to spread out while mercury on the
same surface tends to form drops. (Put differently, water wets glass while
mercury does not.)
2024-25200 PHYSICS
(c) Surface tension of a liquid is independent of the area of the surface
(d) Water with detergent disolved in it should have small angles of contact.
(e) A drop of liquid under no external forces is always spherical in shape
9.3 Fill in the blanks using the word(s) from the list appended with each statement:
(a) Surface tension of liquids generally ... with temperatures (increases / decreases)
(b) Viscosity of gases ... with temperature, whereas viscosity of liquids ... with
temperature (increases / decreases)
(c) For solids with elastic modulus of rigidity, the shearing force is proportional
to ... , while for fluids it is proportional to ... (shear strain / rate of shear
strain)
(d) For a fluid in a steady flow, the increase in flow speed at a constriction follows
(conservation of mass / Bernoulli’s principle)
(e) For the model of a plane in a wind tunnel, turbulence occurs at a ... speed for
turbulence for an actual plane (greater / smaller)
9.4 Explain why
(a) To keep a piece of paper horizontal, you should blow over, not under, it
(b) When we try to close a water tap with our fingers, fast jets of water gush
through the openings between our fingers
(c) The size of the needle of a syringe controls flow rate better than the thumb
pressure exerted by a doctor while administering an injection
(d) A fluid flowing out of a small hole in a vessel results in a backward thrust on
the vessel
(e) A spinning cricket ball in air does not follow a parabolic trajectory
9.5 A 50 kg girl wearing high heel shoes balances on a single heel. The heel is circular with
a diameter 1.0 cm. What is the pressure exerted by the heel on the horizontal floor?
9.6 Toricelli’s barometer used mercury. Pascal duplicated it using French wine of density
984 kg m–3. Determine the height of the wine column for normal atmospheric
pressure.
9.7 A vertical off-shore structure is built to withstand a maximum stress of 109 Pa. Is
the structure suitable for putting up on top of an oil well in the ocean ? Take the
depth of the ocean to be roughly 3 km, and ignore ocean currents.
9.8 A hydraulic automobile lift is designed to lift cars with a maximum mass of 3000
kg. The area of cross-section of the piston carrying the load is 425 cm2. What
maximum pressure would the smaller piston have to bear?
9.9 A U-tube contains water and methylated spirit separated by mercury. The mercury
columns in the two arms are in level with 10.0 cm of water in one arm and 12.5 cm
of spirit in the other. What is the specific gravity of spirit?
9.10 In the previous problem, if 15.0 cm of water and spirit each are further poured into
the respective arms of the tube, what is the difference in the levels of mercury in the
two arms? (Specific gravity of mercury = 13.6)
9.11 Can Bernoulli’s equation be used to describe the flow of water through a rapid in a
river? Explain.
9.12 Does it matter if one uses gauge instead of absolute pressures in applying Bernoulli’s
equation? Explain.
9.13 Glycerine flows steadily through a horizontal tube of length 1.5 m and radius 1.0
cm. If the amount of glycerine collected per second at one end is 4.0 × 10–3 kg s–1,
what is the pressure difference between the two ends of the tube? (Density of glycerine
= 1.3 × 103 kg m–3 and viscosity of glycerine = 0.83 Pa s). [You may also like to check
if the assumption of laminar flow in the tube is correct].
9.14 In a test experiment on a model aeroplane in a wind tunnel, the flow speeds on the
upper and lower surfaces of the wing are 70 m s–1and 63 m s-1 respectively. What is
the lift on the wing if its area is 2.5 m2 ? Take the density of air to be 1.3 kg m–3.
9.15 Figures 9.20(a) and (b) refer to the steady flow of a (non-viscous) liquid. Which of
the two figures is incorrect? Why?
2024-25MECHANICAL PROPERTIES OF FLUIDS 201
Fig. 9.20
9.16 The cylindrical tube of a spray pump has a cross-section of 8.0 cm2 one end of
which has 40 fine holes each of diameter 1.0 mm. If the liquid flow inside the tube
is 1.5 m min–1, what is the speed of ejection of the liquid through the holes?
9.17 A U-shaped wire is dipped in a soap solution, and removed. The thin soap film
formed between the wire and the light slider supports a weight of 1.5 × 10–2 N (which
includes the small weight of the slider). The length of the slider is 30 cm. What is
the surface tension of the film?
9.18 Figure 9.21 (a) shows a thin liquid film supporting a small weight = 4.5 × 10–2 N.
What is the weight supported by a film of the same liquid at the same temperature
in Fig. (b) and (c)? Explain your answer physically.
Fig. 9.21
9.19 What is the pressure inside the drop of mercury of radius 3.00 mm at room temperature?
Surface tension of mercury at that temperature (20°C) is 4.65 × 10–1 N m–1. The
atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa. Also give the excess pressure inside the drop.
9.20 What is the excess pressure inside a bubble of soap solution of radius 5.00 mm,
given that the surface tension of soap solution at the temperature (20°C) is 2.50 ×
10–2 N m–1? If an air bubble of the same dimension were formed at depth of 40.0 cm
inside a container containing the soap solution (of relative density 1.20), what would
be the pressure inside the bubble? (1 atmospheric pressure is 1.01 × 105 Pa).
2024-25