1
GUIDELINES FOR QUESTIONS
IN
SCIENCE
General instructions
1. Objective/task of the question school be well difined.
2. Value points should be stated clearly in the marking scheme.
3. If the expected answer is based on a diagram given in NCERT text book, its reference be given with fig no.
and page no.
4. In numerical based questions emphasis should be given on scientific concepts rather than computational skills.
5. Numerical problem should have all possible information required for the solution. For example, value of g,
Avagrado number, atomic masses etc. should be mentioned.
6. The data given in the numerical problems should be practicable.
7. No question should be lifted directly from any help book.
8. Language of the questions should be simple and unnecessary detail should be avoided.
9. Multicoulured diagram for printing in question paper should be avoided.
10. Syllabus prescribed by CBSE should be followed strictly. However, for depth of the content, NCERT book
may be considered as reference.
GUIEDELINES (SCIENCE PAPER)
VSA
1. Questions should be precise and pin pointed.
2. Action verbs like define, explain, describe and discuss should be avoided.
3. The anwer should not be of more than 2 value points.
4. The answer should be of one word or one sentence.
5. In diagram based questions instead of asking “to draw the diagram”, “to label” can be asked.
2
MCQ
1. The questions should be strictly based on testing the skills required for doing practicals and these should not be
theory based.
2. The questions should be such that it can be answered by only those students who have actually performed the
practicals in schools.
3. All the four options should be relevent.
4. Options like ‘all the above’ and ‘none o the above’ should be avoided.
5. The stem of question should not be too long.
6. As far as possible the language of the stem should be such that on adding the option it makes the sentence
complete.
7. The objective to be tested should be clear while framing the question.
8. Irrelevant hypothetical data/diagram should not given in the question.
SA-1 (2MARKS)
1. Question should not be of more than 4 value points.
2. Questions asking comparision, differents definitions, simple diagrams with two labels can be asked.
3. Question should be from different units.
4. Question should not be divided into parts.
SA-II(3MARKS)
1. Complete diagram with 4 to 6 labels can be asked based questions.
2. Numerical based questions can be asked.
3. Explanations, reasonings, prediction, interpretation type question can be asked.
4. Maximum value points should not be more than 6 and not less than 3.
5. If the question is divided into parts, the parts should be inter related and not unrelated.
3
FOR LA (5MARKS)
1. The question should not be divided into parts that are not related or are from different units/chapters of the
same unit.
2. There should be minimum 5 value points and maximum 10 value points.
3. Diagram based descriptive question can be asked.
4. The answer of the question should also reflect the descriptive skill of the child.
5. The internal choice question should be from the same unit and be of same difficulty level testing the same
objective.



The question paper comprises of two sections, A and B, You are to attempt both the sections.
All questions are compulsory.

There is no overall choice. However internal choice has been provided in all the five
questions of five marks category. Only one option in such questions is to be attempted.

All questions of section A and all questions of section B are to be attempted separately.

Question numbers 1 to 3 in section A are one mark questions. These are to be answered in
one word or one sentence.

Question numbers 4 to 7 are two mark questions, to be answered in about 30 words each.

Question numbers 8 to 19 are three mark questions, to be answered in about 50 words
each.

Question numbers 20 to 24 are five mark questions, to be answered in about 70 words
each.

Question number 25 to 42 in section B are multiple choice questions based on practical
skills. Each question is a one mark question. You are to choose one most appropriate
response out of the four provided to you.