66
UUUUUnnnnniiiiittttt
HHHHHHHHHHaaaaaaaaaallllllllllooooooooooaaaaaaaaaallllllllllkkkkkkkkkkaaaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnneeeeeeeeeessssssssss aaaaaaaaaannnnnnnnnndddddddddd
Objectives
HHHHHHHHHHaaaaaaaaaallllllllllooooooooooaaaaaaaaaarrrrrrrrrreeeeeeeeeennnnnnnnnneeeeeeeeeessssssssss
After studying this Unit, you will be
able to
• name haloalkanes and haloarenes
according to the IUPAC system of
nomenclature from their given
structures; Halogenated compounds persist in the environment due to their
• describe the reactions involved in resistance to breakdown by soil bacteria.
the preparation of haloalkanes and
haloarenes and understand
various reactions that they The replacement of hydrogen atom(s) in an aliphatic
undergo; or aromatic hydrocarbon by halogen atom(s) results
• correlate the structures of in the formation of alkyl halide (haloalkane) and aryl
haloalkanes and haloarenes with halide (haloarene), respectively. Haloalkanes contain
various types of reactions; halogen atom(s) attached to the sp3 hybridised carbon
• use stereochemistry as a tool for atom of an alkyl group whereas haloarenes contain
understanding the reaction
halogen atom(s) attached to sp2 hybridised carbon
mechanism;
atom(s) of an aryl group. Many halogen containing
• appreciate the applications of
organic compounds occur in nature and some of
organo-metallic compounds;
these are clinically useful. These classes of compounds
• highlight the environmental effects
find wide applications in industry as well as in day-
of polyhalogen compounds.
to-day life. They are used as solvents for relatively
non-polar compounds and as starting materials for
the synthesis of wide range of organic compounds.
Chlorine containing antibiotic, chloramphenicol,
produced by microorganisms is very effective for the
treatment of typhoid fever. Our body produces iodine
containing hormone, thyroxine, the deficiency of which
causes a disease called goiter. Synthetic halogen
compounds, viz. chloroquine is used for the treatment
of malaria; halothane is used as an anaesthetic
during surgery. Certain fully fluorinated compounds
are being considered as potential blood substitutes
in surgery.
In this Unit, you will study the important methods
of preparation, physical and chemical properties and
uses of organohalogen compounds.
Rationalised 2023-2466666.....11111 CCCCClllllaaaaassssssssssiiiiifffffiiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Haloalkanes and haloarenes may be classified as follows:
6.1.1 On the These may be classified as mono, di, or polyhalogen (tri-,tetra-, etc.)
Basis of compounds depending on whether they contain one, two or more halogen
Number of atoms in their structures. For example,
Halogen
Atoms
Monohalocompounds may further be classified according to the
hybridisation of the carbon atom to which the halogen is bonded, as
discussed below.
6.1.2 Compounds This class includes
Containing
(a) Alkyl halides or haloalkanes (R—X)
sp3 C—X
In alkyl halides, the halogen atom is bonded to an alkyl group (R).
Bond (X= F,
They form a homologous series represented by C H X. They are
Cl, Br, I) n 2n+1
further classified as primary, secondary or tertiary according to the
nature of carbon to which halogen is attached. If halogen is attached to
a primary carbon atom in an alkyl halide, the alkyl halide is called
primary alkyl halide or 1° alkyl halide. Similarly, if halogen is attached
to secondary or tertiary carbon atom, the alkyl halide is called
secondary alkyl halide (2°) and tertiary (3°) alkyl halide, respectively.
(b) Allylic halides
These are the compounds in which the halogen atom is bonded to an
sp3-hybridised carbon atom adjacent to carbon-carbon double bond
(C=C) i.e. to an allylic carbon.
Allylic carbon
Allylic carbon
(c) Benzylic halides
These are the compounds in which the halogen atom is bonded to an
sp3-hybridised carbon atom attached to an aromatic ring.
Chemistry 160
Rationalised 2023-246.1.3 Compounds This class includes:
Containing
(a) Vinylic halides
sp2 C—X
These are the compounds in which the halogen atom is bonded to
Bond
a sp2-hybridised carbon atom of a carbon-carbon double bond
(C = C).
(b) Aryl halides
These are the compounds in which the halogen atom is directly
bonded to the sp2-hybridised carbon atom of an aromatic ring.
66666.....22222 NNNNNooooommmmmeeeeennnnnccccclllllaaaaatttttuuuuurrrrreeeee
Having learnt the classification of halogenated compounds, let us now learn
how these are named. The common names of alkyl halides are derived by
naming the alkyl group followed by the name of halide. In the IUPAC system
of nomenclature, alkyl halides are named as halosubstituted hydrocarbons.
For mono halogen substituted derivatives of benzene, common and IUPAC
names are the same. For dihalogen derivatives, the prefixes o-, m-, p- are
used in common system but in IUPAC system, as you have learnt in Class
XI, the numerals 1,2; 1,3 and 1,4 are used.
The dihaloalkanes having the same type of halogen atoms are named
as alkylidene or alkylene dihalides. The dihalo-compounds having both
the halogen atoms are further classified as geminal halides or gem-dihalides
when both the halogen atoms are present on the same carbon atom of the
161 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24chain and vicinal halides or vic-dihalides when halogen atoms are present
on adjacent carbon atoms. In common name system, gem-dihalides are
named as alkylidene halides and vic-dihalides are named as alkylene
dihalides. In IUPAC system, they are named as dihaloalkanes.
Some common examples of halocompounds are mentioned in Table 6.1.
Table 6.1: Common and IUPAC Names of some Halides
Structure Common name IUPAC name
CH CH CH(Cl)CH sec-Butyl chloride 2-Chlorobutane
3 2 3
(CH ) CCH Br neo-Pentyl bromide 1-Bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane
3 3 2
(CH ) CBr tert-Butyl bromide 2-Bromo-2-methylpropane
3 3
CH = CHCl Vinyl chloride Chloroethene
2
CH = CHCH Br Allyl bromide 3-Bromopropene
2 2
o-Chlorotoluene 1-Chloro-2-methylbenzene
or
2-Chlorotoluene
Benzyl chloride Chlorophenylmethane
CH Cl Methylene chloride Dichloromethane
2 2
CHCl Chloroform Trichloromethane
3
CHBr Bromoform Tribromomethane
3
CCl Carbon tetrachloride Tetrachloromethane
4
CH CH CH F n-Propyl fluoride 1-Fluoropropane
3 2 2
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....11111 Draw the structures of all the eight structural isomers that have the
molecular formula C H Br. Name each isomer according to IUPAC system
5 11
and classify them as primary, secondary or tertiary bromide.
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn CH CH CH CH CH Br 1-Bromopentane (1o)
3 2 2 2 2
CH CH CH CH(Br)CH 2-Bromopentane(2o)
3 2 2 3
CH CH CH(Br)CH CH 3-Bromopentane (2o)
3 2 2 3
(CH ) CHCH CH Br 1-Bromo-3-methylbutane (1o)
32 2 2
Chemistry 162
Rationalised 2023-24(CH ) CHCHBrCH 2-Bromo-3-methylbutane(2o)
32 3
(CH ) CBrCH CH 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane (3o)
32 2 3
CH CH CH(CH )CH Br 1-Bromo-2-methylbutane(1o)
3 2 3 2
(CH ) CCH Br 1-Bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane (1o)
33 2
Write IUPAC names of the following: EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....22222
(i) 4-Bromopent-2-ene (ii) 3-Bromo-2-methylbut-1-ene SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(iii) 4-Bromo-3-methylpent-2-ene (iv) 1-Bromo-2-methylbut-2-ene
(v) 1-Bromobut-2-ene (vi) 3-Bromo-2-methylpropene
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
6.1 Write structures of the following compounds:
(i) 2-Chloro-3-methylpentane
(ii) 1-Chloro-4-ethylcyclohexane
(iii) 4-tert. Butyl-3-iodoheptane
(iv) 1,4-Dibromobut-2-ene
(v) 1-Bromo-4-sec. butyl-2-methylbenzene.
66666.....33333 NNNNNaaaaatttttuuuuurrrrreeeee ooooofffff Halogen atoms are more electronegative than carbon, therefore,
carbon-halogen bond of alkyl halide is polarised; the carbon atom bears
CCCCC-----XXXXX BBBBBooooonnnnnddddd
a partial positive charge whereas the halogen atom bears a partial
negative charge.
As we go down the group in the periodic table, the size of halogen
atom increases. Fluorine atom is the smallest and iodine atom is the
largest. Consequently the carbon-halogen bond length also increases
from C—F to C—I. Some typical bond lengths, bond enthalpies and
dipole moments are given in Table 6.2.
Alkyl halides are best prepared from alcohols, which are easily accessible.
163 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24Table 6.2: Carbon-Halogen (C—X) Bond Lengths, Bond
Enthalpies and Dipole Moments
Bond Bond length/pm C-X Bond enthalpies/ kJmol-1 Dipole moment/Debye
CH –F 139 452 1.847
3
CH – Cl 178 351 1.860
3
CH –Br 193 293 1.830
3
CH –I 214 234 1.636
3
66666.....44444 MMMMMeeeeettttthhhhhooooodddddsssss ooooofffff
The hydroxyl group of an alcohol is replaced by halogen on reaction with
PPPPPrrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn concentrated halogen acids, phosphorus halides or thionyl chloride.
Thionyl chloride is preferred because in this reaction alkyl halide is formed
ooooofffff HHHHHaaaaallllloooooaaaaalllllkkkkkaaaaannnnneeeeesssss
along with gases SO and HCl. The two gaseous products are escapable,
2
hence, the reaction gives pure alkyl halides. The reactions of primary and
6.4.1 From Alcohols
secondary alcohols with HCl require the presence of a catalyst, ZnCl .
2
With tertiary alcohols, the reaction is conducted by simply shaking the
alcohol with concentrated HCl at room temperature. Constant boiling
with HBr (48%) is used for preparing alkyl bromide. Good yields of
R—I may be obtained by heating alcohols with sodium or potassium
iodide in 95% orthophosphoric acid. The order of reactivity of alcohols
with a given haloacid is 3°>2°>1°. Phosphorus tribromide and triiodide
are usually generated in situ (produced in the reaction mixture) by the
reaction of red phosphorus with bromine and iodine respectively.
The preparation of alkyl chloride is carried out either by passing
dry hydrogen chloride gas through a solution of alcohol or by heating
a mixture of alcohol and concentrated aqueous halogen acid.
The above methods are not applicable for the preparation of aryl
halides because the carbon-oxygen bond in phenols has a partial double
bond character and is difficult to break being stronger than a single
bond.
6.4.2 From (I) From alkanes by free radical halogenation
Hydrocarbons Free radical chlorination or bromination of alkanes gives a complex
mixture of isomeric mono- and polyhaloalkanes, which is difficult to
Chemistry 164
Rationalised 2023-24separate as pure compounds. Consequently, the yield of any single
compound is low.
(II) From alkenes
(i) Addition of hydrogen halides: An alkene is converted to
corresponding alkyl halide by reaction with hydrogen chloride,
hydrogen bromide or hydrogen iodide.
Propene yields two products, however only one predominates as
per Markovnikov’s rule. (Unit 13, Class XI)
(ii) Addition of halogens: In the laboratory, addition of bromine in
CCl to an alkene resulting in discharge of reddish brown colour
4
of bromine constitutes an important method for the detection of
double bond in a molecule. The addition results in the synthesis
of vic-dibromides, which are colourless (Unit 9, Class XI).
Identify all the possible monochloro structural isomers expected to be EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....33333
formed on free radical monochlorination of (CH ) CHCH CH .
3 2 2 3
In the given molecule, there are four different types of hydrogen atoms. SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
Replacement of these hydrogen atoms will give the following
(CH ) CHCH CH Cl (CH ) CHCH(Cl)CH
32 2 2 32 3
(CH ) C(Cl)CH CH CH CH(CH Cl)CH CH
32 2 3 3 2 2 3
6.4.3 Halogen Alkyl iodides are often prepared by the reaction of alkyl chlorides/
Exchange bromides with NaI in dry acetone. This reaction is known as Finkelstein
reaction.
NaCl or NaBr thus formed is precipitated in dry acetone. It facilitates
the forward reaction according to Le Chatelier’s Principle.
The synthesis of alkyl fluorides is best accomplished by heating an
alkyl chloride/bromide in the presence of a metallic fluoride such as
165 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24AgF, Hg F , CoF or SbF . The reaction is termed as Swarts reaction.
2 2 2 3
66666.....55555 PPPPPrrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff (i) From hydrocarbons by electrophilic substitution
HHHHHaaaaallllloooooaaaaarrrrreeeeennnnneeeeesssss Aryl chlorides and bromides can be easily prepared by electrophilic
substitution of arenes with chlorine and bromine respectively in the
presence of Lewis acid catalysts like iron or iron(III) chloride.
The ortho and para isomers can be easily separated due to large
difference in their melting points. Reactions with iodine are reversible
in nature and require the presence of an oxidising agent (HNO ,
3
HIO ) to oxidise the HI formed during iodination. Fluoro compounds
4
are not prepared by this method due to high reactivity of fluorine.
(ii) From amines by Sandmeyer’s reaction
When a primary aromatic amine, dissolved or suspended in cold
aqueous mineral acid, is treated with sodium nitrite, a diazonium
salt is formed. Mixing the solution of freshly prepared diazonium
salt with cuprous chloride or cuprous bromide results in the
replacement of the diazonium group by –Cl or –Br.
Replacement of the diazonium group by iodine does not require the
presence of cuprous halide and is done simply by shaking the diazonium
salt with potassium iodide.
Chemistry 166
Rationalised 2023-24EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....44444
Write the products of the following reactions:
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
6.2 Why is sulphuric acid not used during the reaction of alcohols with KI?
6.3 Write structures of different dihalogen derivatives of propane.
6.4 Among the isomeric alkanes of molecular formula C H , identify the one that
5 12
on photochemical chlorination yields
(i) A single monochloride.
(ii) Three isomeric monochlorides.
(iii) Four isomeric monochlorides.
6.5 Draw the structures of major monohalo products in each of the following
reactions:
66666.....66666 PPPPPhhhhhyyyyysssssiiiiicccccaaaaalllll Alkyl halides are colourless when pure. However, bromides and iodides
develop colour when exposed to light. Many volatile halogen compounds
PPPPPrrrrrooooopppppeeeeerrrrrtttttiiiiieeeeesssss
have sweet smell.
167 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24Melting and boiling points
Methyl chloride, methyl bromide, ethyl chloride and some
chlorofluoromethanes are gases at room temperature. Higher members
are liquids or solids. As we have already learnt, molecules of organic
halogen compounds are generally polar. Due to greater polarity as well
as higher molecular mass as compared to the parent hydrocarbon, the
intermolecular forces of attraction (dipole-dipole and van der Waals)
are stronger in the halogen derivatives. That is why the boiling points
of chlorides, bromides and iodides are considerably higher than those
of the hydrocarbons of comparable molecular mass.
The attractions get stronger as the molecules get bigger in size and
have more electrons. The pattern of variation of boiling points of different
halides is depicted in Fig. 6.1. For the same alkyl group, the boiling
points of alkyl halides decrease in the order: RI> RBr> RCl> RF. This
is because with the increase in size and mass of halogen atom, the
magnitude of van der Waal forces increases.
Fig. 6.1: Comparison of boiling points of some alkyl halides
The boiling points of isomeric haloalkanes decrease with increase
in branching. For example, 2-bromo-2-methylpropane has the lowest
boiling point among the three isomers.
Boiling points of isomeric dihalobenzenes are very nearly the same.
However, the para-isomers are high melting as compared to their ortho-
and meta-isomers. It is due to symmetry of para-isomers that fits in
crystal lattice better as compared to ortho- and meta-isomers.
Chemistry 168
Rationalised 2023-24Density
Bromo, iodo and polychloro derivatives of hydrocarbons are heavier than
water. The density increases with increase in number of carbon atoms,
halogen atoms and atomic mass of the halogen atoms (Table 6.3).
Table 6.3: Density of Some Haloalkanes
Compound Density (g/mL) Compound Density (g/mL)
n–C H Cl 0.89 CH Cl 1.336
3 7 2 2
n–C H Br 1.335 CHCl 1.489
3 7 3
n-C H I 1.747 CCl 1.595
3 7 4
Solubility
The haloalkanes are very slightly soluble in water. In order to dissolve
haloalkane in water, energy is required to overcome the attractions between
the haloalkane molecules and break the hydrogen bonds between water
molecules. Less energy is released when new attractions are set up between
the haloalkane and the water molecules as these are not as strong as the
original hydrogen bonds in water. As a result, the solubility of haloalkanes
in water is low. However, haloalkanes tend to dissolve in organic solvents
because the new intermolecular attractions between haloalkanes and
solvent molecules have much the same strength as the ones being broken
in the separate haloalkane and solvent molecules.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
6.6 Arrange each set of compounds in order of increasing boiling points.
(i) Bromomethane, Bromoform, Chloromethane, Dibromomethane.
(ii) 1-Chloropropane, Isopropyl chloride, 1-Chlorobutane.
66666.....77777 CCCCChhhhheeeeemmmmmiiiiicccccaaaaalllll The reactions of haloalkanes may be divided into the following categories:
RRRRReeeeeaaaaaccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss 1. Nucleophilic substitution
2. Elimination reactions
6.7.1 Reactions of
3. Reaction with metals.
Haloalkanes
(1)Nucleophilic substitution reactions
You have learnt in Class XI that nucleophiles are electron rich species.
Therefore, they attack at that part of the substrate molecule which
is electron deficient. The reaction in which a nucleophile replaces
169 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24already existing nucleophile in a molecule is called nucleophilic
substitution reaction. Haloalkanes are substrate in these reactions.
In this type of reaction, a nucleophile reacts with haloalkane (the
substrate) having a partial positive charge on the carbon atom bonded
to halogen. A substitution reaction takes place and halogen atom,
called leaving group departs as halide ion. Since the substitution
reaction is initiated by a nucleophile, it is called nucleophilic
substitution reaction.
It is one of the most useful classes of organic reactions of alkyl
halides in which halogen is bonded to sp3 hybridised carbon. The
products formed by the reaction of haloalkanes with some common
nucleophiles are given in Table 6.4.
Table 6.4: Nucleophilic Substitution of Alkyl Halides (R–X)
Reagent Nucleophile Substitution Class of main
(Nu–) product R–Nu product
NaOH (KOH) HO– ROH Alcohol
HO HO ROH Alcohol
2 2
NaOR¢ R¢O– ROR¢ Ether
NaI I– R—I Alkyl iodide
NH NH RNH Primary amine
3 3 2
R¢NH R¢NH RNHR¢ Sec. amine
2 2
R¢R¢¢NH R¢R¢¢NH RNR¢R¢¢ Tert. amine
KCN RCN Nitrile
(cyanide)
AgCN Ag-CN: RNC Isonitrile
(isocyanide)
KNO O=N—O R—O—N=O Alkyl nitrite
2
AgNO Ag—Ö—N=O R—NO Nitroalkane
2 2
R¢COOAg R¢COO– R¢COOR Ester
LiAlH H RH Hydrocarbon
4
R¢– M+ R¢– RR¢ Alkane
Groups like cyanides and nitrites possess two nucleophilic centres
and are called ambident nucleophiles. Actually cyanide group is a
hybrid of two contributing structures and therefore can act as a
nucleophile in two different ways [VC”N « :C=NV], i.e., linking through
Chemistry 170
Rationalised 2023-24Haloalkanes react with KCN to form alkyl cyanides as main product EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....55555
while AgCN forms isocyanides as the chief product. Explain.
KCN is predominantly ionic and provides cyanide ions in solution. SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
Although both carbon and nitrogen atoms are in a position to donate
electron pairs, the attack takes place mainly through carbon atom and
not through nitrogen atom since C—C bond is more stable than C—N
bond. However, AgCN is mainly covalent in nature and nitrogen is free
to donate electron pair forming isocyanide as the main product.
carbon atom resulting in alkyl cyanides and through nitrogen atom
leading to isocyanides. Similarly nitrite ion also represents an ambident
ii
nucleophile with two different points of linkage [–O—N=O]. The linkage
through oxygen results in alkyl nitrites while through nitrogen atom, it
leads to nitroalkanes.
Mechanism: This reaction has been found to proceed by two different
mechanims which are described below:
(a) Substitution nucleophilic bimolecular (S 2)
N
The reaction between CH Cl and hydroxide ion to yield methanol and
3
chloride ion follows a second order kinetics, i.e., the rate depends
upon the concentration of both the reactants.
The solid wedge represents the bond coming out of the paper, dashed line going down the
paper and a straight line representing bond in the plane of the paper.
The above reaction can be represented diagrammatically as shown in
Fig. 6.2.
Fig. 6.2: Red ball represents the incoming hydroxide ion and green ball represents
the outgoing halide ion
In the year 1937, It depicts a bimolecular nucleophilic substitution (S 2) reaction;
N
Edward Davies Hughes the incoming nucleophile interacts with alkyl halide causing the
and Sir Christopher
carbon-halide bond to break and a new bond is formed between
Ingold proposed a
carbon and attacking nucleophile. Here it is C-O bond formed between
mechanism for an S 2
reaction. N C and -OH. These two processes take place simultaneously in a
171 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24single step and no intermediate is formed. As the reaction progresses
and the bond between the incoming nucleophile and the carbon
atom starts forming, the bond between carbon atom and leaving
group weakens. As this happens, the three carbon-hydrogen bonds
of the substrate start moving away from the attacking nucleophile. In
transition state all the three C-H bonds are in the same plane and the
attacking and leaving nucleophiles are partially attached to the
carbon. As the attacking nucleophile approaches closer to the carbon,
C-H bonds still keep on moving in the same direction till the attacking
nucleophile attaches to carbon and leaving group leaves the carbon.
As a result configuration is inverted, the configuration (See box) of
carbon atom under attack inverts in much the same way as an
umbrella is turned inside out when caught in a strong wind. This
process is called as inversion of configuration. In the transition
state, the carbon atom is simultaneously bonded to incoming
nucleophile and the outgoing leaving group. Such structures are
unstable and cannot be isolated. Thus, in the transition state, carbon
is simultaneously bonded to five atoms.
Configuration
Spacial arrangement of functional groups around carbon is called its configuration.
See the structures (A) and (B) given below carefully.
These are the two structures of the same compound. They differ in spacial arrangement
of functional groups attached to carbon. Structure (A) is mirror image of Structure (B).
We say configuration of carbon in structure (A) is mirror image of the configuration of
carbon in structure (B).
Hughes worked under Since this reaction requires the approach of the nucleophile to the
Ingold and earned a carbon bearing the leaving group, the presence of bulky substituents
D.Sc. degree from the
on or near the carbon atom have a dramatic inhibiting effect. Of the
University of London.
simple alkyl halides, methyl halides react most rapidly in S 2 reactions
N
because there are only three small hydrogen atoms. Tertiary halides
are the least reactive because bulky groups hinder the approaching
Chemistry 172
Rationalised 2023-24nucleophiles. Thus the order of reactivity followed is:
Primary halide > Secondary halide > Tertiary halide.
Fig.6.3: Steric effects in S 2 reaction. The relative rate of S 2 reaction is given in parenthesis
N N
(b) Substitution nucleophilic unimolecular (S 1)
N
S 1 reactions are generally carried out in polar protic solvents
N
(like water, alcohol, acetic acid, etc.). The reaction between tert-
butyl bromide and hydroxide ion yields tert-butyl alcohol and
follows the first order kinetics, i.e., the rate of reaction depends
upon the concentration of only one reactant, which is tert- butyl
bromide.
It occurs in two steps. In step I, the polarised C—Br bond undergoes
slow cleavage to produce a carbocation and a bromide ion. The
carbocation thus formed is then attacked by nucleophile in step II
to complete the substitution reaction.
173 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24Step I is the slowest and reversible. It involves the C–Br bond breaking for which the
energy is obtained through solvation of halide ion with the proton of protic solvent. Since
the rate of reaction depends upon the slowest step, the rate of reaction depends only on the
concentration of alkyl halide and not on the concentration of hydroxide ion. Further, greater
the stability of carbocation, greater will be its ease of formation from alkyl halide and faster
will be the rate of reaction. In case of alkyl halides, 30 alkyl halides undergo S 1 reaction
N
very fast because of the high stability of 30 carbocations. We can sum up the order of reactivity
of alkyl halides towards S 1 and S 2 reactions as follows:
N N
For the same reasons, allylic and benzylic halides show high reactivity towards the S 1
N
reaction. The carbocation thus formed gets stabilised through resonance (Unit 8, Class XI) as
shown below:
+ +
H C C CH H C C CH
2 H 2 2 H 2
For a given alkyl group, the reactivity of the halide, R-X, follows the same order in both the
mechanisms R–I> R–Br>R–Cl>>R–F.
In the following pairs of halogen compounds, which would undergo EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....66666
S 2 reaction faster?
N
It is primary halide and therefore undergoes S 2 SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
N
reaction faster.
As iodine is a better leaving group because of its
large size, it will be released at a faster rate in the
presence of incoming nucleophile.
Predict the order of reactivity of the following EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....77777
compounds in S 1 and S 2 reactions:
N N
(i) The four isomeric bromobutanes
(ii) C H CH Br, C H CH(C H )Br, C H CH(CH )Br, C H C(CH )(C H )Br
6 5 2 6 5 6 5 6 5 3 6 5 3 6 5
Chemistry 174
Rationalised 2023-24SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn (i) CH CH CH CH Br <(CH ) CHCH Br <CH CH CH(Br)CH <(CH ) CBr (S 1)
3 2 2 2 32 2 3 2 3 33 N
CH CH CH CH Br> (CH ) CHCH Br> CH CH CH(Br)CH > (CH ) CBr(S 2)
3 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 3 33 N
Of the two primary bromides, the carbocation intermediate derived from
(CH ) CHCH Br is more stable than derived from CH CH CH CH Br because
32 2 3 2 2 2
of greater electron donating inductive effect of (CH ) CH- group. Therefore,
32
(CH ) CHCH Br is more reactive than CH CH CH CH Br in S 1 reactions.
3 2 2 3 2 2 2 N
CH CH CH(Br)CH is a secondary bromide and (CH ) CBr is a tertiary
3 2 3 3 3
bromide. Hence the above order is followed in S 1. The reactivity in S 2
N N
reactions follows the reverse order as the steric hinderance around the
electrophilic carbon increases in that order.
(ii) C H C(CH )(C H )Br > C H CH(C H )Br > C H CH(CH )Br > C H CH Br (S 1)
6 5 3 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 3 6 5 2 N
C H C(CH )(C H )Br < C H CH(C H )Br < C H CH(CH )Br < C H CH Br (S 2)
6 5 3 6 5 6 5 6 5 6 5 3 6 5 2 N
Of the two secondary bromides, the carbocation intermediate obtained
from C H CH(C H )Br is more stable than obtained from C H CH(CH )Br
6 5 6 5 6 5 3
because it is stabilised by two phenyl groups due to resonance. Therefore,
the former bromide is more reactive than the latter in S 1 reactions. A
N
phenyl group is bulkier than a methyl group. Therefore, C H CH(C H )Br
6 5 6 5
is less reactive than C H CH(CH )Br in S 2 reactions.
6 5 3 N
(c) Stereochemical aspects of nucleophilic substitution reactions
In order to understand the stereochemical aspects of substitution
reactions, we need to learn some basic stereochemical principles
and notations (optical activity, chirality, retention, inversion,
racemisation, etc.).
(i) Optical activity: Plane of plane polarised light produced by
passing ordinary light through Nicol prism is rotated when it
is passed through the solutions of certain compounds. Such
compounds are called optically active compounds. The angle
William Nicol (1768- by which the plane polarised light is rotated is measured by an
1851) developed the first instrument called polarimeter. If the compound rotates the plane
prism that produced of plane polarised light to the right, i.e., clockwise direction, it
plane polarised light.
is called dextrorotatory (Greek for right rotating) or the d-form
and is indicated by placing a positive (+) sign before the degree
of rotation. If the light is rotated towards left (anticlockwise
direction), the compound is said to be laevo-rotatory or the
l-form and a negative (–) sign is placed before the degree of
rotation. Such (+) and (–) isomers of a compound are called
optical isomers and the phenomenon is termed as optical
isomerism.
(ii) Molecular asymmetry, chirality and enantiomers: The
observation of Louis Pasteur (1848) that crystals of certain
compounds exist in the form of mirror images laid the
foundation of modern stereochemistry. He demonstrated that
aqueous solutions of both types of crystals showed optical
rotation, equal in magnitude (for solution of equal concentration)
but opposite in direction. He believed that this difference in
optical activity was associated with the three dimensional
arrangements of atoms in the molecules (configurations) of
175 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24two types of crystals. Dutch scientist, J. Van’t Hoff and French
scientist, C. Le Bel in the same year (1874), independently
argued that the spatial arrangement of four groups (valencies)
Jacobus Hendricus
around a central carbon is tetrahedral and if all the substituents
Van’t Hoff (1852-1911)
attached to that carbon are different, the mirror image of the
received the first Nobel
molecule is not superimposed (overlapped) on the molecule;
Prize in Chemistry in
1901 for his work on such a carbon is called asymmetric carbon or stereocentre.
solutions. The resulting molecule would lack symmetry and is referred to
as asymmetric molecule. The asymmetry of the molecule along
with non superimposability of mirror images is responsible for
the optical activity in such organic compounds.
The symmetry and asymmetry are also observed in many day to day
objects: a sphere, a cube, a cone, are all identical to
their mirror images and can be superimposed.
However, many objects are non superimposable on
their mirror images. For example, your left and right
hand look similar but if you put your left hand on
your right hand by moving them in the same plane,
they do not coincide. The objects which are non-
superimposable on their mirror image (like a pair
of hands) are said to be chiral and this property is
known as chirality. Chiral molecules are optically
active, while the objects, which are, superimposable
on their mirror images are called achiral. These
molecules are optically inactive.
The above test of molecular chirality can be
applied to organic molecules by constructing
models and its mirror images or by drawing three
dimensional structures and attempting to
superimpose them in our minds. There are other
aids, however, that can assist us in recognising
chiral molecules. One such aid is the presence of
Fig 6.4: Some common examples of chiral and
a single asymmetric carbon atom. Let us consider
achiral objects
two simple molecules propan-2-ol (Fig.6.5) and butan-2-ol (Fig.6.6)
and their mirror images.
Fig 6.5: B is mirror image of A; B is rotated by 180o and C is
obtained; C is superimposable on A.
As you can see very clearly, propan-2-ol (A) does not contain an asymmetric
carbon, as all the four groups attached to the tetrahedral carbon are not
different. We rotate the mirror image (B) of the molecule by 180° (structure
C) and try to overlap the structure (C) with the structure (A), these structures
completely overlap. Thus propan-2-ol is an achiral molecule.
Chemistry 176
Rationalised 2023-24Fig 6.6: E is mirror image of D; E is rotated by 180o to get F and F is
non superimposable on its mirror image D.
Butan-2-ol has four different groups attached to
the tetrahedral carbon and as expected is chiral. Some common
examples of chiral molecules such as
2-chlorobutane, 2, 3-dihyroxypropanal, (OHC–CHOH–CH OH),
2
bromochloro-iodomethane (BrClCHI),2-bromopropanoic acid
(H C–CHBr–COOH), etc.
3
Fig. 6.7: A chiral molecule The stereoisomers related to each other as non-
and its mirror image superimposable mirror images are called enantiomers
(Fig. 6.7). A and B in Fig. 6.5 and D and E in Fig. 6.6 are
enantiomers.
Enantiomers possess identical physical properties namely,
melting point, boiling point, refractive index, etc. They only differ
with respect to the rotation of plane polarised light. If one of the
enantiomer is dextro rotatory, the other will be laevo rotatory.
However, the sign of optical rotation is not necessarily related to
the absolute (actual) configuration of the molecule.
A mixture containing two enantiomers in equal proportions
will have zero optical rotation, as the rotation due to one isomer
will be cancelled by the rotation due to the other isomer. Such
a mixture is known as racemic mixture or racemic
modification. A racemic mixture is represented by prefixing dl
or (–) before the name, for example (–) butan-2-ol. The process
of conversion of enantiomer into a racemic mixture is known as
racemisation.
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....88888 Identify chiral and achiral molecules in each of the following pair of
compounds. (Wedge and Dash representations according to Class XI.
177 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(iii) Retention: Retention of configuration is the preservation of the spatial
arrangement of bonds to an asymmetric centre during a chemical
reaction or transformation.
In general, if during a reaction, no bond to the stereocentre is broken,
the product will have the same general configuration of groups
around the stereocentre as that of reactant. Such a reaction is said
to proceed with retention of the configuration. Consider as an
example, the reaction that takes place when (–)-2-methylbutan-1-ol
is heated with concentrated hydrochloric acid.
It is important to note that configuration at a symmetric centre in
the reactant and product is same but the sign of optical rotation
has changed in the product. This is so because two different
compounds with same configuration at asymmetric centre may have
different optical rotation. One may be dextrorotatory (plus sign of
optical rotation) while other may be laevorotatory (negative sign of
optical rotation).
(iv) Inversion, retention and racemisation: There are three outcomes
for a reaction at an asymmetric carbon atom, when a bond directly
linked to an asymmetric carbon atom is broken. Consider the
replacement of a group X by Y in the following reaction;
If (A) is the only compound obtained, the process is called retention
of configuration. Note that configuration has been rotated in A.
If (B) is the only compound obtained, the process is called inversion
of configuration. Configuration has been inverted in B.
Chemistry 178
Rationalised 2023-24If a 50:50 mixture of A and B is obtained then the process is called
racemisation and the product is optically inactive, as one isomer will
rotate the plane polarised light in the direction opposite to another.
Now let us have a fresh look at S 1 and S 2 mechanisms by
N N
taking examples of optically active alkyl halides.
In case of optically active alkyl halides, the product formed as a
result of S 2 mechanism has the inverted configuration as compared
N
to the reactant. This is because the nucleophile attaches itself on the
side opposite to the one where the halogen atom is present. When
(–)-2-bromooctane is allowed to react with sodium hydroxide,
(+)-octan-2-ol is formed with the –OH group occupying the position
opposite to what bromide had occupied.
Thus, S 2 reactions of optically active halides are accompanied by
N
inversion of configuration.
In case of optically active alkyl halides, S 1 reactions are
N
accompanied by racemisation. Can you think of the reason why it
happens? Actually the carbocation formed in the slow step being sp2
hybridised is planar (achiral). The attack of the nucleophile may be
accomplished from either side of the plane of carbocation resulting in
a mixture of products, one having the same configuration (the –OH
attaching on the same position as halide ion) and the other having
Location of aaaaa and opposite configuration (the –OH attaching on the side opposite to halide
bbbbb carbon in a ion). This may be illustrated by hydrolysis of optically active
molecule 2-bromobutane, which results in the formation of (–)-butan-2-ol.
Carbon on which 2. Elimination reactions
halogen atom is When a haloalkane with b-hydrogen atom is heated with alcoholic
directly attached is solution of potassium hydroxide, there is elimination of hydrogen
called a-carbon and atom from b-carbon and a halogen atom from the a-carbon atom.
the carbon atom
adjacent to this
carbon is called
b-carbon.
179 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24As a result, an alkene is formed as a product. Since b-hydrogen
atom is involved in elimination, it is often called bbbbb-elimination.
If there is possibility of formation of more than one alkene due to
the availability of more than one b-hydrogen atoms, usually one alkene
is formed as the major product. These form part of a pattern first
observed by Russian chemist, Alexander Zaitsev (also pronounced as
Saytzeff) who in 1875 formulated a rule which can be summarised as
“in dehydrohalogenation reactions, the preferred product is that
alkene which has the greater number of alkyl groups attached to the
doubly bonded carbon atoms.” Thus, 2-bromopentane gives
pent-2-ene as the major product.
EEEEEllllliiiiimmmmmiiiiinnnnnaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn vvvvveeeeerrrrrsssssuuuuusssss sssssuuuuubbbbbssssstttttiiiiitttttuuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
A chemical reaction is the result of competition; it is a race that is won by the fastest
runner. A collection of molecules tend to do, by and large, what is easiest for them. An
alkyl halide with b-hydrogen atoms when reacted with a base or a nucleophile has two
competing routes: substitution (S 1 and S 2) and elimination. Which route will be taken
N N
up depends upon the nature of alkyl halide, strength and size of base/nucleophile and
reaction conditions. Thus, a bulkier nucleophile will prefer to act as a base and abstracts
a proton rather than approach a tetravalent carbon atom (steric reasons) and vice versa.
Similarly, a primary alkyl halide will prefer a S 2 reaction, a secondary halide- S 2 or
N N
elimination depending upon the strength of base/nucleophile and a tertiary halide- S 1 or
N
elimination depending upon the stability of carbocation or the more substituted alkene.
3.Reaction with metals
Most organic chlorides, bromides and iodides react with certain
metals to give compounds containing carbon-metal bonds. Such
compounds are known as organo-metallic compounds. An
important class of organo-metallic compounds discovered by Victor
Grignard in 1900 is alkyl magnesium halide, RMgX, referred as
Grignard Reagents. These reagents are obtained by the reaction of
haloalkanes with magnesium metal in dry ether.
Chemistry 180
Rationalised 2023-24Victor Grignard had a strange start in academic life for a chemist - he
took a maths degree. When he eventually switched to chemistry, it was
not to the mathematical province of physical chemistry but to organic
chemistry. While attempting to find an efficient catalyst for the process
of methylation, he noted that Zn in diethyl ether had been used for this
purpose and wondered whether the Mg/ether combination might be
successful. Grignard reagents were first reported in 1900 and Grignard
used this work for his doctoral thesis in 1901. In 1910, Grignard obtained
a professorship at the University of Nancy and in 1912, he was awarded
the Nobel prize for Chemistry which he shared with Paul Sabatier who
had made advances in nickel catalysed hydrogenation.
In the Grignard reagent, the carbon-magnesium bond is covalent
but highly polar, with carbon pulling electrons from electropositive
magnesium; the magnesium halogen bond is essentially ionic.
Grignard reagents are highly reactive and react with any source of
proton to give hydrocarbons. Even water, alcohols, amines are sufficiently
acidic to convert them to corresponding hydrocarbons.
It is therefore necessary to avoid even traces of moisture from a Grignard
reagent. That is why reaction is carried out in dry ether. On the other
hand, this could be considered as one of the methods for converting
halides to hydrocarbons.
Wurtz reaction
Alkyl halides react with sodium in dry ether to give hydrocarbons
containing double the number of carbon atoms present in the halide.
This reaction is known as Wurtz reaction.
6.7.2 Reactionsof
1. Nucleophilic substitution
Haloarenes
Aryl halides are extremely less reactive towards nucleophilic
substitution reactions due to the following reasons:
(i) Resonance effect : In haloarenes, the electron pairs on halogen
atom are in conjugation with p-electrons of the ring and the
following resonating structures are possible.
C—Cl bond acquires a partial double bond character due to
resonance. As a result, the bond cleavage in haloarene is difficult
than haloalkane and therefore, they are less reactive towards
nucleophilic substitution reaction.
181 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24(ii) Difference in hybridisation of carbon atom in C—X bond: In
haloalkane, the carbon atom attached to halogen is sp3
hybridised while in case of haloarene, the carbon atom attached
to halogen is sp2-hybridised.
The sp2 hybridised carbon with a greater s-character is more
electronegative and can hold the electron pair of C—X bond
more tightly than sp3-hybridised carbon in haloalkane with
less s-chararcter. Thus, C—Cl bond length in haloalkane is
177pm while in haloarene is 169 pm. Since it is difficult to
break a shorter bond than a longer bond, therefore, haloarenes
are less reactive than haloalkanes towards nucleophilic
substitution reaction.
(iii) Instability of phenyl cation: In case of haloarenes, the phenyl
cation formed as a result of self-ionisation will not be stabilised
by resonance and therefore, S 1 mechanism is ruled out.
N
(iv) Because of the possible repulsion, it is less likely for the electron
rich nucleophile to approach electron rich arenes.
Replacement by hydroxyl group
Chlorobenzene can be converted into phenol by heating in aqueous
sodium hydroxide solution at a temperature of 623K and a pressure
of 300 atmospheres.
The presence of an electron withdrawing group (-NO ) at ortho- and
2
para-positions increases the reactivity of haloarenes.
Chemistry 182
Rationalised 2023-24The effect is pronounced when (-NO ) group is introduced at ortho-
2
and para- positions. However, no effect on reactivity of haloarenes is
observed by the presence of electron withdrawing group at meta-position.
Mechanism of the reaction is as depicted:
Can you think why does NO group show its effect only at ortho- and para- positions
2
and not at meta- position?
As shown, the presence of nitro group at ortho- and para-positions withdraws the
electron density from the benzene ring and thus facilitates the attack of the nucleophile
on haloarene. The carbanion thus formed is stabilised through resonance. The negative
charge appeared at ortho- and para- positions with respect to the halogen substituent is
stabilised by –NO group while in case of meta-nitrobenzene, none of the resonating
2
structures bear the negative charge on carbon atom bearing the –NO group. Therefore,
2
the presence of nitro group at meta- position does not stabilise the negative charge and
no effect on reactivity is observed by the presence of –NO group at meta-position.
2
183 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-242. Electrophilic substitution reactions
Haloarenes undergo the usual electrophilic reactions of the benzene
ring such as halogenation, nitration, sulphonation and Friedel-Crafts
reactions. Halogen atom besides being slightly deactivating is o, p-
directing; therefore, further substitution occurs at ortho- and para-
positions with respect to the halogen atom. The o, p-directing influence
of halogen atom can be easily understood if we consider the resonating
structures of halobenzene as shown:
Due to resonance, the electron density increases more at ortho- and
para-positions than at meta-positions. Further, the halogen atom
because of its –I effect has some tendency to withdraw electrons from
the benzene ring. As a result, the ring gets somewhat deactivated as
compared to benzene and hence the electrophilic substitution reactions
in haloarenes occur slowly and require more drastic conditions as
compared to those in benzene.
(i) Halogenation
(ii)Nitration
(iii) Sulphonation
Chemistry 184
Rationalised 2023-24(iv) Friedel-Crafts reaction
EEEEExxxxxaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee 66666.....99999 Although chlorine is an electron withdrawing group, yet it is ortho-,
para- directing in electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions. Why?
SSSSSooooollllluuuuutttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Chlorine withdraws electrons through inductive effect and releases
electrons through resonance. Through inductive effect, chlorine
destabilises the intermediate carbocation formed during the electrophilic
substitution.
Through resonance, halogen tends to stabilise the carbocation and
the effect is more pronounced at ortho- and para- positions. The
inductive effect is stronger than resonance and causes net electron
withdrawal and thus causes net deactivation. The resonance effect
tends to oppose the inductive effect for the attack at ortho- and para-
positions and hence makes the deactivation less for ortho- and para-
attack. Reactivity is thus controlled by the stronger inductive effect
and orientation is controlled by resonance effect.
185 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-243. Reaction with metals
Wurtz-Fittig reaction
A mixture of an alkyl halide and aryl halide gives an alkylarene when
treated with sodium in dry ether and is called Wurtz-Fittig reaction.
Fittig reaction
Aryl halides also give analogous compounds when treated with sodium
in dry ether, in which two aryl groups are joined together. It is called
Fittig reaction.
IIIIInnnnnttttteeeeexxxxxttttt QQQQQuuuuueeeeessssstttttiiiiiooooonnnnnsssss
6.7 Which alkyl halide from the following pairs would you expect to react more
rapidly by an S 2 mechanism? Explain your answer.
N
6.8 In the following pairs of halogen compounds, which compound undergoes faster
S 1 reaction?
N
6.9 Identify A, B, C, D, E, R and R1 in the following:
Chemistry 186
Rationalised 2023-2466666.....88888 PPPPPooooolllllyyyyyhhhhhaaaaalllllooooogggggeeeeennnnn Carbon compounds containing more than one halogen atom are usually
referred to as polyhalogen compounds. Many of these compounds are
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppooooouuuuunnnnndddddsssss
useful in industry and agriculture. Some polyhalogen compounds are
described in this section.
6.8.1 Dichloro- Dichloromethane is widely used as a solvent as a paint remover, as a
methane propellant in aerosols, and as a process solvent in the manufacture of
(Methylene drugs. It is also used as a metal cleaning and finishing solvent. Methylene
chloride) chloride harms the human central nervous system. Exposure to lower
levels of methylene chloride in air can lead to slightly impaired hearing
and vision. Higher levels of methylene chloride in air cause dizziness,
nausea, tingling and numbness in the fingers and toes. In humans, direct
skin contact with methylene chloride causes intense burning and mild
redness of the skin. Direct contact with the eyes can burn the cornea.
6.8.2 Trichloro- Chemically, chloroform is employed as a solvent for fats, alkaloids,
methane iodine and other substances. The major use of chloroform today is in
(Chloroform) the production of the freon refrigerant R-22. It was once used as a
general anaesthetic in surgery but has been replaced by less toxic,
safer anaesthetics, such as ether. As might be expected from its use as
an anaesthetic, inhaling chloroform vapours depresses the central
nervous system. Breathing about 900 parts of chloroform per million
parts of air (900 parts per million) for a short time can cause dizziness,
fatigue, and headache. Chronic chloroform exposure may cause damage
to the liver (where chloroform is metabolised to phosgene) and to the
kidneys, and some people develop sores when the skin is immersed in
chloroform. Chloroform is slowly oxidised by air in the presence of
light to an extremely poisonous gas, carbonyl chloride, also known as
phosgene. It is therefore stored in closed dark coloured bottles
completely filled so that air is kept out.
6.8.3 Triiodo- It was used earlier as an antiseptic but the antiseptic properties are
methane due to the liberation of free iodine and not due to iodoform itself. Due
(Iodoform) to its objectionable smell, it has been replaced by other formulations
containing iodine.
6.8.4 Tetrachlo- It is produced in large quantities for use in the manufacture of
romethane refrigerants and propellants for aerosol cans. It is also used as
(Carbon feedstock in the synthesis of chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals,
tetrachloride) pharmaceutical manufacturing, and general solvent use. Until the mid
1960s, it was also widely used as a cleaning fluid, both in industry,
as a degreasing agent, and in the home, as a spot remover and as fire
extinguisher. There is some evidence that exposure to carbon
tetrachloride causes liver cancer in humans. The most common effects
are dizziness, light headedness, nausea and vomiting, which can cause
permanent damage to nerve cells. In severe cases, these effects can lead
rapidly to stupor, coma, unconsciousness or death. Exposure to CCl
4
can make the heart beat irregularly or stop. The chemical may irritate
the eyes on contact. When carbon tetrachloride is released into the air,
it rises to the atmosphere and depletes the ozone layer. Depletion of the
187 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-24ozone layer is believed to increase human exposure to ultraviolet rays,
leading to increased skin cancer, eye diseases and disorders, and
possible disruption of the immune system.
6.8.5 Freons The chlorofluorocarbon compounds of methane and ethane are collectively
known as freons. They are extremely stable, unreactive, non-toxic, non-
corrosive and easily liquefiable gases. Freon 12 (CCl F ) is one of the
2 2
most common freons in industrial use. It is manufactured from
tetrachloromethane by Swarts reaction. These are usually produced
for aerosol propellants, refrigeration and air conditioning purposes. By
1974, total freon production in the world was about 2 billion pounds
annually. Most freon, even that used in refrigeration, eventually makes
its way into the atmosphere where it diffuses unchanged into the
stratosphere. In stratosphere, freon is able to initiate radical chain
reactions that can upset the natural ozone balance.
6.8.6 p,p’-Dichlo- DDT, the first chlorinated organic insecticides, was originally prepared
rodiphenyl- in 1873, but it was not until 1939 that Paul Muller of Geigy
trichloro- Pharmaceuticals in Switzerland discovered the effectiveness of DDT as
ethane(DDT) an insecticide. Paul Muller was awarded the Nobel Prize in Medicine
and Physiology in 1948 for this discovery. The use of DDT increased
enormously on a worldwide basis after World War II, primarily because
of its effectiveness against the mosquito that spreads malaria and lice
that carry typhus. However, problems related to extensive use of DDT
began to appear in the late 1940s. Many species of insects developed
resistance to DDT, and it was also discovered to have a high toxicity
towards fish. The chemical stability of DDT and its fat solubility
compounded the problem. DDT is not metabolised very rapidly by
animals; instead, it is deposited and stored in the fatty tissues. If
ingestion continues at a steady rate, DDT builds up within the animal
over time. The use of DDT was banned in the United States in 1973,
although it is still in use in some other parts of the world.
SSSSSuuuuummmmmmmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy
Alkyl/ Aryl halides may be classified as mono, di, or polyhalogen (tri-, tetra-, etc.)
compounds depending on whether they contain one, two or more halogen atoms in
their structures. Since halogen atoms are more electronegative than carbon, the carbon-
halogen bond of alkyl halide is polarised; the carbon atom bears a partial positive
charge, and the halogen atom bears a partial negative charge.
Alkyl halides are prepared by the free radical halogenation of alkanes, addition
of halogen acids to alkenes, replacement of –OH group of alcohols with halogens using
Chemistry 188
Rationalised 2023-24phosphorus halides, thionyl chloride or halogen acids. Aryl halides are prepared by
electrophilic substitution to arenes. Fluorides and iodides are best prepared by halogen
exchange method.
The boiling points of organohalogen compounds are comparatively higher than the
corresponding hydrocarbons because of strong dipole-dipole and van der Waals forces
of attraction. These are slightly soluble in water but completely soluble in organic
solvents.
The polarity of carbon-halogen bond of alkyl halides is responsible for their
nucleophilic substitution, elimination and their reaction with metal atoms to form
organometallic compounds. Nucleophilic substitution reactions are categorised into
S 1 and S 2 on the basis of their kinetic properties. Chirality has a profound role in
N N
understanding the reaction mechanisms of S 1 and S 2 reactions. S 2 reactions of
N N N
chiral alkyl halides are characterised by the inversion of configuration while S 1 reactions
N
are characterised by racemisation.
A number of polyhalogen compounds e.g., dichloromethane, chloroform, iodoform,
carbon tetrachloride, freon and DDT have many industrial applications. However,
some of these compounds cannot be easily decomposed and even cause depletion of
ozone layer and are proving environmental hazards.
Exercises
6.1 Name the following halides according to IUPAC system and classify them as
alkyl, allyl, benzyl (primary, secondary, tertiary), vinyl or aryl halides:
(i) (CH ) CHCH(Cl)CH (ii) CH CH CH(CH )CH(C H )Cl
32 3 3 2 3 2 5
(iii) CH CH C(CH ) CH I (iv) (CH ) CCH CH(Br)C H
3 2 32 2 3 3 2 6 5
(v) CH CH(CH )CH(Br)CH (vi) CH C(C H ) CH Br
3 3 3 3 2 52 2
(vii) CH C(Cl)(C H )CH CH (viii) CH CH=C(Cl)CH CH(CH )
3 2 5 2 3 3 2 3 2
(ix) CH CH=CHC(Br)(CH ) (x) p-ClC H CH CH(CH )
3 3 2 6 4 2 32
(xi) m-ClCH C H CH C(CH ) (xii) o-Br-C H CH(CH )CH CH
2 6 4 2 33 6 4 3 2 3
6.2 Give the IUPAC names of the following compounds:
(i) CH CH(Cl)CH(Br)CH (ii) CHF CBrClF (iii) ClCH C”CCH Br
3 3 2 2 2
(iv) (CCl ) CCl (v) CH C(p-ClC H ) CH(Br)CH (vi) (CH ) CCH=CClC H I-p
3 3 3 6 42 3 33 6 4
6.3 Write the structures of the following organic halogen compounds.
(i) 2-Chloro-3-methylpentane (ii) p-Bromochlorobenzene
(iii) 1-Chloro-4-ethylcyclohexane (iv) 2-(2-Chlorophenyl)-1-iodooctane
(v) 2-Bromobutane (vi) 4-tert-Butyl-3-iodoheptane
(vii) 1-Bromo-4-sec-butyl-2-methylbenzene (viii) 1,4-Dibromobut-2-ene
6.4 Which one of the following has the highest dipole moment?
(i) CH Cl (ii) CHCl (iii) CCl
2 2 3 4
6.5 A hydrocarbon C H does not react with chlorine in dark but gives a single
5 10
monochloro compound C H Cl in bright sunlight. Identify the hydrocarbon.
5 9
6.6 Write the isomers of the compound having formula C H Br.
4 9
6.7 Write the equations for the preparation of 1-iodobutane from
(i) 1-butanol (ii) 1-chlorobutane (iii) but-1-ene.
6.8 What are ambident nucleophiles? Explain with an example.
189 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-246.9 Which compound in each of the following pairs will react faster in S 2 reaction
N
with –OH?
(i) CH Br or CH I (ii) (CH ) CCl or CH Cl
3 3 33 3
6.10 Predict all the alkenes that would be formed by dehydrohalogenation of the
following halides with sodium ethoxide in ethanol and identify the major alkene:
(i) 1-Bromo-1-methylcyclohexane (ii) 2-Chloro-2-methylbutane
(iii) 2,2,3-Trimethyl-3-bromopentane.
6.11 How will you bring about the following conversions?
(i) Ethanol to but-1-yne (ii) Ethane to bromoethene (iii) Propene to
1-nitropropane (iv) Toluene to benzyl alcohol (v) Propene to propyne
(vi) Ethanol to ethyl fluoride (vii) Bromomethane to propanone (viii) But-1-ene
to but-2-ene (ix) 1-Chlorobutane to n-octane (x) Benzene to biphenyl.
6.12 Explain why
(i) the dipole moment of chlorobenzene is lower than that of cyclohexyl chloride?
(ii) alkyl halides, though polar, are immiscible with water?
(iii) Grignard reagents should be prepared under anhydrous conditions?
6.13 Give the uses of freon 12, DDT, carbon tetrachloride and iodoform.
6.14 Write the structure of the major organic product in each of the following reactions:
(i) CH CH CH Cl + NaI
3 2 2
(ii) (CH ) CBr + KOH
33
(iii) CH CH(Br)CH CH + NaOH
3 2 3
(iv) CH CH Br + KCN
3 2
(v) C H ONa + C H Cl
6 5 2 5
(vi) CH CH CH OH + SOCl
3 2 2 2
(vii) CH CH CH = CH + HBr
3 2 2
(viii) CH CH = C(CH ) + HBr
3 32
6.15 Write the mechanism of the following reaction:
nBuBr + KCN nBuCN
6.16 Arrange the compounds of each set in order of reactivity towards S 2
N
displacement:
(i) 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane, 1-Bromopentane, 2-Bromopentane
(ii) 1-Bromo-3-methylbutane, 2-Bromo-2-methylbutane, 2-Bromo-3-methylbutane
(iii) 1-Bromobutane, 1-Bromo-2,2-dimethylpropane, 1-Bromo-2-methylbutane,
1-Bromo-3-methylbutane.
6.17 Out of C H CH Cl and C H CHClC H , which is more easily hydrolysed by aqueous
6 5 2 6 5 6 5
KOH.
6.18 p-Dichlorobenzene has higher m.p. than those of o- and m-isomers. Discuss.
6.19 How the following conversions can be carried out?
(i) Propene to propan-1-ol
(ii) Ethanol to but-1-yne
(iii) 1-Bromopropane to 2-bromopropane
Chemistry 190
Rationalised 2023-24(iv) Toluene to benzyl alcohol
(v) Benzene to 4-bromonitrobenzene
(vi) Benzyl alcohol to 2-phenylethanoic acid
(vii) Ethanol to propanenitrile
(viii) Aniline to chlorobenzene
(ix) 2-Chlorobutane to 3, 4-dimethylhexane
(x) 2-Methyl-1-propene to 2-chloro-2-methylpropane
(xi) Ethyl chloride to propanoic acid
(xii) But-1-ene to n-butyliodide
(xiii) 2-Chloropropane to 1-propanol
(xiv) Isopropyl alcohol to iodoform
(xv) Chlorobenzene to p-nitrophenol
(xvi) 2-Bromopropane to 1-bromopropane
(xvii) Chloroethane to butane
(xviii) Benzene to diphenyl
(xix) tert-Butyl bromide to isobutyl bromide
(xx) Aniline to phenylisocyanide
6.20 The treatment of alkyl chlorides with aqueous KOH leads to the formation of
alcohols but in the presence of alcoholic KOH, alkenes are majorproducts. Explain.
6.21 Primary alkyl halide C H Br (a) reacted with alcoholic KOH to give compound(b).
4 9
Compound (b) is reacted with HBr to give (c) which is an isomer of (a). When
(a) is reacted with sodium metal it gives compound (d), C H which is different
8 18
from the compound formed when n-butyl bromide is reacted with sodium.
Give the structural formula of (a) and write the equations for all the reactions.
6.22 What happens when
(i) n-butyl chloride is treated with alcoholic KOH,
(ii) bromobenzene is treated with Mg in the presence of dry ether,
(iii) chlorobenzene is subjected to hydrolysis,
(iv) ethyl chloride is treated with aqueous KOH,
(v) methyl bromide is treated with sodium in the presence of dry ether,
(vi) methyl chloride is treated with KCN?
Answers to Some Intext Questions
6.1
6.2 (i) H SO cannot be used along with KI in the conversion of an alcohol to
2 4
an alkyl iodide as it converts KI to corresponding acid, HI which is then
oxidised by it to I .
2
6.3 (i) ClCH CH CH Cl (ii) ClCH CHClCH (iii) Cl CHCH CH (iv) CH CCl CH
2 2 2 2 3 2 2 3 3 2 3
191 Haloalkanes and Haloarenes
Rationalised 2023-246.4 All the hydrogen atoms are equivalent and replacement
of any hydrogen will give the same product.
The equivalent hydrogens are grouped as a, b and
c. The replacement of equivalent hydrogens will
give the same product.
Similarly the equivalent hydrogens are grouped as
a, b, c and d. Thus, four isomeric products are
possible.
6.5
6.6 (i) Chloromethane, Bromomethane, Dibromomethane, Bromoform.
Boiling point increases with increase in molecular mass.
(ii) Isopropylchloride, 1-Chloropropane, 1-Chlorobutane.
Isopropylchloride being branched has lower b.p. than 1-
Chloropropane.
6.7 (i) CH CH CH CH Br Being primary halide, there won’t be any
3 2 2 2
steric hindrance.
(ii) Secondary halide reacts faster than tertiary
halide.
(iii) The presence of methyl group closer to the
halide group will increase the steric
hindrance and decrease the rate.
6.8 (i) Tertiary halide reacts faster than secondary halide
because of the greater stability of tert-carbocation.
Because of greater stability of secondary carbocation than
(ii)
primary.
6.9
Chemistry 192
Rationalised 2023-24